Title: Developing Models of Procedural Skills using an AI-assisted Text-to-Model Approach

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.17624v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 01:38:45 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# Developing Models of Procedural Skills using an AI-assisted Text-to-Model Approach 

# Rahul K. Dass 

Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta, GA, USA rdass7@gatech.edu 

# Shubham Puri 

Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta, GA, USA spuri62@gatech.edu 

# Arpit Khandelwal 

Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta, GA, USA akhandelwal83@gatech.edu 

# Xiao Jin 

Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta, GA, USA xjin96@gatech.edu 

# Ashok K. Goel 

Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta, GA, USA ashok.goel@cc.gatech.edu 

## Abstract 

Scalable AI tutoring for procedural skill learning requires structured knowledge representations, yet constructing these representations remains a labor-intensive bottleneck. This paper presents a human-in-the-loop text-to-model pipeline that uses large language models to transform instructional materials into schema-complete Task-Method-Knowledge models of procedural skills through ontology-constrained prompting and template-based generation. The ap-proach automates structural scaffolding while preserving expert oversight for validating causal transitions and failure conditions. We apply the pipeline to instructional materials from a graduate-level online AI course, constructing 23 procedural skill models. AI-assisted authoring reduced expert modeling time by 50–70% while producing structurally valid and highly reproducible models under fixed-input conditions. We evaluate structural validity, semantic alignment, reproducibility, and refinement effort to characterize au-thoring scalability. Results indicate that AI-assisted text-to-model methods can substantially lower the cost of constructing structured procedural representations, making course-wide deployment of structured AI coaching systems practically feasible. 

ACM Reference Format: 

Rahul K. Dass, Shubham Puri, Arpit Khandelwal, Xiao Jin, and Ashok K. Goel. 2026. Developing Models of Procedural Skills using an AI-assisted Text-to-Model Approach. In Proceedings of (arXiv Preprint). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 

## 1 Introduction 

Online learning environments increasingly integrate generative AI-based intelligent tutoring systems (ITS) to provide interactive support for diverse learner populations [ 31 , 23 ]. In video-based courses, learners frequently seek clarification about procedural skills. For example, how to implement a method or why a step is valid [ 20 , 19 ]. While large language models (LLMs) can generate fluent explanations [ 30 , 9], reliable support for procedural skill learning requires explicit representations of task structure, skill mechanisms (e.g., sequence of actions and logical data conditions), and domain-specific concepts and relations, properties that are dif-ficult to capture through prompt engineering or retrieval alone. 

> arXiv Preprint, ,
> 2026. ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06 https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

Recent hybrid approaches that combine structured knowledge mod-els with generative synthesis offer a promising path toward im-proving explanation reliability in AI-supported learning systems [40, 8, 32, 7]. However, the scalability of such systems depends not only on runtime generation of explanations to questions or feedback to learner submissions, but on the feasibility of constructing the un-derlying structured knowledge representations. Prior work in ITS has long identified domain modeling and authoring as a primary bottleneck for scalable deployment: building formal representations of skills (rule-based, hierarchical, or graph-structured), requires substantial expert effort and limits coverage across courses and curricula [ 27 , 34 ]. In large-scale online courses that span dozens or hundreds of skills across many hours of instructional content, achieving structured AI support requires constructing and evaluat-ing a comparable number of models. When each model demands hours of expert design and refinement, full-course coverage be-comes impractical. Under these conditions, the scalability challenge lies less in generative capability and more in scalable knowledge authoring infrastructure. To address this bottleneck, we introduce a human-in-the-loop text-to-model (TTM) pipeline that uses LLMs to transform instruc-tional materials into schema-complete models of procedural skills through ontology-constrained prompting and template-based gen-eration. The pipeline automates structural completion tasks—such as extracting domain concepts and scaffolding procedural mech-anisms—while preserving expert oversight for validating causal transitions and failure conditions. Our central research question is: 

RQ: To what extent can AI-assisted TTM methods reduce the manual effort required to construct explicit procedural skill representations for structured AI tutoring systems at scale? In a case study using instructional materials from a graduate online AI course at a large research university, we modeled 23 procedural skills using the TTM approach. AI-assisted authoring reduced expert modeling time by 50–70% while producing struc-turally valid and reproducible models, indicating that course-wide structured AI tutoring deployment is practically feasible. This work makes three contributions: (1) a scalable, instructor-facing text-to-model pipeline for semi-automated construction of structured procedural knowledge representations, (2) an evalua-tion framework assessing structural and semantic validity, repro-ducibility, and refinement effort of TTM-generated models, and (3)  

> arXiv:2604.17624v1 [cs.HC] 19 Apr 2026 arXiv Preprint, , Rahul K. Dass, Shubham Puri, Arpit Khandelwal, Xiao Jin, and Ashok K. Goel

empirical evidence that a TTM methodology substantially reduces expert authoring time, enabling realistic course-wide deployment of structured AI tutoring systems. 

## 2 Related Work 

The transformation of unstructured natural language text into struc-tured, formal models represents a challenge in artificial intelligence. Text-to-model methods bridge the gap between human-readable text and machine-interpretable representations. These methods have experienced a renaissance with the advent of large language models and neural-symbolic integration. The field has progressed from isolated information extraction components to end-to-end sys-tems that seamlessly convert natural language into formal knowl-edge representations. 

## 2.1 Authoring Bottlenecks in Intelligent Tutoring Systems 

The current authoring bottleneck is to scaling intelligent tutor-ing systems. Murray demonstrated that developing model-tracing tutors with the cognitive tutor authoring tools required approxi-mately 200-300 hours of expert effort per hour of instruction, with the majority of time spent on constructing production rule mod-els [ 28 ]. This finding has been replicated across multiple tutoring architectures. Aleven reported a 1:50 to 1:100 development costs for cognitive tutors with improved authoring tools, noting that domain experts struggled particularly with formalizing procedural knowledge into executable rules [1]. The scalability challenge arises from the need for domain mod-els to be both computationally precise and pedagogically complete. Koedinger’s analysis of tutoring system development showed that constructing domain models, such as production rules, constraint-based models, and example tracers, consumed most authoring time. It often requires multiple iterations for experts to accurately for-malize domain knowledge [ 21 ]. Van Lehn distinguished between “inner loop” authoring (creating individual problem steps and hints) and “outer loop” authoring (curriculum sequencing), finding that inner loop knowledge engineering is the critical bottleneck since outer loop tasks could be automated [36]. 

## 2.2 LLM-Assisted Structured Knowledge Construction 

LLMs are powerful tools for transforming unstructured text into structured knowledge representations that conform to predefined schemas. Schema-constrained extraction leverages LLMs’ under-standing capabilities while imposing structural constraints that ensure the output adheres to specific ontologies, database schemas, or knowledge graph formats. KnowCoder introduces a code-style schema representation method that uniformly transforms different schemas into Python classes, capturing complex schema informa-tion such as constraints among tasks and concept taxonomies in an LLM-friendly manner. This approach systematically extracted and organized information from free-form text into machine-readable, queryable formats while maintaining semantic richness [24]. LLMs can effectively perform schema-constrained extraction when guided through careful prompt engineering or fine-tuning. PARSE is a framework that improves structured information ex-traction for LLM-based software by automatically refining JSON schemas and applying reflection-based guardrails [ 33 ]. However, deploying LLMs on resource-constrained devices for information extraction can be challenging due to issues such as hallucinations, limited context length, and high latency, especially when handling diverse extraction schemas[37]. LLMs facilitate automated ontology construction and enrich-ment. Recent work demonstrates using LLMs to generate training data for ontology learning through verbalization, converting OWL statements into natural language to create text-ontology pairs[ 38 ]. KG-FIT [ 16 ] presented methods integrating LLM-guided semantic refinement with knowledge graph embedding, enabling structured models to capture both global semantic knowledge from text and lo-cal relational structure from graphs. By incorporating hierarchical entity clustering during fine-tuning, KG-FIT improves the quality and expressiveness of learned representations. In addition, recent work has targeted knowledge graph con-struction from domain specific documents. GenIE [ 17 ] introduces a closed information extraction framework as an end-to-end au-toregressive approach that leverages pretrained language models to generate schema-consistent entities and relations directly in text form, enabling scalable and accurate model construction while reducing error accumulation typical of pipeline-based methods. AutoKG [ 6 ] automatically constructs knowledge graphs by extract-ing keywords from text using LLMs, estimating relational weights via graph Laplace learning, and integrating vector similarity with graph-based associations to enable more structured and contextu-ally rich knowledge retrieval. ULTRA [ 11 ] introduces a foundation model for knowledge graphs that achieves zero-shot link prediction across diverse KG schemas through structural pre-training. It learns universal relational representations conditioned on interaction pat-terns, enabling text-based methods to generalize inductively to unseen knowledge graphs and support scalable model construction and inference across diverse domains. Most recently, Text-to-Multimodal Model (T2MM) was reported as an LLM-supported architecture designed to facilitate inquiry-based modeling in science education. Unlike traditional AI systems that generate static images or complete code outputs, T2MM cre-ates interactive, dynamic models by translating learners’ natural language requests into structured action sequences that modify live model states. It operates as an iterative, context-aware modeling approach and supports the full cycle of scientific inquiry, including hypothesis generation, testing, and evaluation. By grounding LLM outputs in the current state of a learner’s model and validating actions, T2MM enables students to collaboratively build and re-fine conceptual models through conversational interaction. This approach reduces the cognitive load associated with manual model construction while preserving the interactivity essential for au-thentic scientific practice, allowing models to remain responsive to both AI-assisted generation and manual adjustment throughout the learning process. 

## 2.3 Evaluation of structured model generation 

Evaluating the quality of LLM-generated structured outputs presents distinct challenges beyond traditional NLP metrics. The problem Developing Models of Procedural Skills using an AI-assisted Text-to-Model Approach arXiv Preprint, , 

of hallucination in structured generation has received particular attention. Zhang demonstrated that even when LLMs generate schema-valid knowledge graphs, a substantial generated facts in their evaluation were not grounded in source documents, with hal-lucination rates varying significantly by relation type and domain complexity[ 39 ]. They evaluated the models by comparing gener-ated triples against ground truth triples using precision, recall, F1 score for fact extraction, ontology conformance for schema correct-ness, and subject/relation/object hallucination metrics to measure faithfulness and errors. As text-to-model systems began generating ontologies and knowl-edge graphs, evaluation shifted toward structural and semantic quality. Common criteria include schema consistency, logical va-lidity, coverage, and inferential capability. Ontology evaluation frameworks measure structural properties such as connectivity and coherence, while knowledge graph studies assess link prediction and graph completion performance [12, 2]. Large language models introduce new evaluation challenges, including hallucinations, semantic drift, and unverifiable outputs. Automatic metrics frequently misalign with human judgment and struggle to detect factual or structural inconsistencies in generated models [ 39 , 5 ]. Structural validity alone does not guarantee do-main relevance or reliability, particularly in open-world generation settings. Recent work emphasizes combining automated checks with expert-driven validation and task-based assessment to ensure practical usability and trustworthiness [13]. 

## 2.4 Modeling Procedural Skills using Task-Method-Knowledge 

Task-Method-Knowledge (TMK) is a structured knowledge repre-sentation designed to model procedural skills by making explicit the goals of a skill ( why ), the mechanisms used to achieve those goals ( how ), and the domain concepts and relations that those procedures operate over ( what ) [ 26 , 35 , 14 ]. TMK originated in knowledge-based AI research as a representation intended to be both human-interpretable and machine-usable for supporting pro-cedural modeling, analysis, and explanation [4, 3]. In contrast to more widely used planning representations such as Hierarchical Task Networks (HTNs), which is used to emphasize goal-directed procedures [ 10 , 29 ], TMK additionally encodes expec-tations and constraints that help connect decomposition structure to conditions, outcomes, and domain semantics. Prior work has argued that TMK-style representations can be more expressive than standard HTN formalisms for capturing procedural knowledge that supports prediction and explanation, making TMK a strong fit for AI in Education settings where systems must explain not only what to do next, but why a step is warranted and when a strategy fails [ 15 , 22 ]. TMK models represent a procedural skill through three interrelated components: 

Task : defines the skill’s goals and subgoals and specifies what counts as success. Tasks typically include typed inputs and outputs, preconditions (“given”), postconditions (“makes”), and references to one or more methods that can accomplish the goal. This structure makes teleological organization explicit by linking procedural ac-tivity to goal satisfaction criteria. A minimal Task schema is shown in Table 1. 

Table 1: Task Component Schema 

Attribute Description 

name Name of the goal or subtask 

description Natural language description of the goal or subtask 

inputParameters Inputs required to invoke the goal 

outputParameters Outputs or effects produced upon com-pletion 

given Preconditions that must hold before in-vocation 

makes Postconditions expected after goal achievement 

mechanismReference References to Method components that realize the goal 

Table 2: Method Component Schema 

Attribute Description 

name Name of the mechanism 

description Natural language description of the mechanism 

inputParameters Inputs required for execution 

outputParameters Outputs produced 

requires Preconditions that must hold before ex-ecution 

provides Postconditions expected after success-ful execution 

organizer Sequence of states and transitions 

Method : defines how Tasks are accomplished. Methods may be represented as organizers - finite-state machines (FSMs) whose states invoke subtasks or atomic operations - or as reusable opera-tions that directly transform world state. Transitions are governed by logical conditions and may include explicit success and failure paths. This structure supports causal chaining by making explicit how state changes depend on conditions and actions. A minimal Method schema is shown in Table 2. 

Table 3: Knowledge Component Schema 

Attribute Description 

Concept Domain entity type (e.g. List, Element) 

superConcept Declares parent-child class relation-ships 

properties Typed attributes of the concept 

Instance Specific named instances of a concept 

values Property-value bindings for an instance 

Relation Links between concepts 

Knowledge : defines the domain ontology over which Tasks and Methods are expressed, including concepts and relations. Knowl-edge provides the vocabulary and constraints needed for type con-sistency and for expressing conditions used in task definitions and arXiv Preprint, , Rahul K. Dass, Shubham Puri, Arpit Khandelwal, Xiao Jin, and Ashok K. Goel 

method transitions. A minimal Knowledge schema is shown in Table 3. For example, a simplified procedural skill such as Sorting a list 

could be represented with a Task that defines the goal ( produce an ordered list ) and references a sorting method; a Method that captures control structure (e.g., iterative insertion ) with tran-sitions guarded by conditions (e.g., comparisons ); and Knowledge that defines concepts such as List and Element and relations such as greaterThan . All three components together encode not only step structure but also the conditions under which steps apply and the criteria for successful completion. In “structured AI tutoring systems”, TMK models can serve as structured scaffolds that constrain or guide generative components, grounding explanations in explicit goal structure, state transitions, and domain terminology. Because TMK models require explicit encoding of decomposition structure, transitions, and domain con-straints, constructing them manually can be time-intensive, moti-vating text-to-model (TTM) methods that aim to semi-automate model drafting while preserving expert oversight. 

## 3 Text-to-Model Authoring Pipeline 

Constructing structured models of procedural skills has tradition-ally required manual, expert-driven authoring, involving careful in-terpretation of instructional materials and explicit encoding of pro-cedural structure, state transitions, and domain constraints. While expressive, this process is time-intensive and does not scale to full-course coverage. To address this bottleneck, we introduce a human-in-the-loop text-to-model (TTM) pipeline that leverages large language models to generate structured drafts under explicit representational constraints. The pipeline operates at authoring time and produces persistent symbolic models rather than runtime explanations. 

## 3.1 Ontology-Constrained Model Construction 

The TTM pipeline follows an ontology-constrained generation process, illustrated in Figure 1. Developers provide instructional ar-tifacts (e.g., lecture transcripts or course documents), formal JSON schemata specifying required model structure, reference documen-tation describing representational semantics, and schema-complete, content-empty templates for each model component. In this study, we implemented the TTM generation pipeline using Google Gem-ini 3, configured with ontology-constrained prompts and schema-complete templates. Because required fields, data types, and or-ganizational structure are predefined, generation is restricted to syntactically valid representational forms. This shifts model con-struction from free-form text synthesis to structured completion under explicit ontological constraints. The resulting TMK model is represented as a structured JSON artifact conforming to the speci-fied schemata (Section 2.4), enabling static validation, programmatic inspection, and downstream use by tutoring systems. 

## 3.2 Iterative Expert Refinement 

Generated drafts undergo at least expert reviews to assess correct causal ordering of procedural steps, completeness of failure condi-tions, alignment with instructional intent, and semantic consistency with domain concepts. Identified deficiencies are translated into targeted refinement prompts, and revised drafts are generated iter-atively. The process continues until structural and semantic criteria are satisfied. This workflow establishes a division of labor: the LLM accelerates structural completion tasks such as extracting domain concepts and scaffolding procedural mechanisms, while experts ensure correctness of transitions, constraints, and pedagogical fi-delity. 

## 3.3 Authoring Workflow 

The pipeline is instructor-facing and requires minimal interaction. Instructional materials are provided, an initial structured draft is generated, and iterative refinement produces a deployment-ready model. Across 23 procedural skills in a graduate-level online course, this ontology-constrained authoring process reduced expert model-ing time by 50–70% while producing structurally valid and repro-ducible models. 

## 4 Evaluation 

To assess our research question - whether AI-assisted TTM methods reduce the manual effort required to construct explicit procedural skill representations at scale - we conduct a structured comparison between: (1) Raw TMKs : generated exclusively by the LLM (no human intervention), and (2) Refined TMKs : models produced after expert iteration and verification. This distinction is central. Raw TMKs reflect the capability of AI-assisted generation. Refined TMKs represent deployment-ready artifacts after expert oversight. By comparing these two sets of TMK models and relating them to prior expert-crafted models, we quan-tify both structural quality and refinement effort. Our evaluation is separated into three complementary categories: 

• Syntactic (rule-based) metrics, 

• Semantic (similarity-based and LLM-assisted) metrics, 

• Expert refinement effort and qualitative analysis. Together, these dimensions allow us to assess structural validity, instructional fidelity, semantic reasoning quality, stability, and the reduction in manual authoring effort. 

## 4.1 Syntactic Evaluation: Structural Integrity and Instructional Grounding 

We first evaluate structural properties of TMK JSON models us-ing a static analysis framework aligned with the TMK syntax and semantics. These metrics assess whether AI-generated drafts are formally valid, internally coherent, and instructionally grounded prior to expert refinement. 

Instructional Alignment . A central concern in AI-assisted modeling is whether extracted procedural concepts reflect the vo-cabulary and structures present in the source instructional ma-terials, rather than generic abstractions derived from model pre-training. We therefore introduce Instructional Alignment, a lexical grounding metric that measures consistency between Task-Method-Knowledge concepts in the generated TMK model and terminology appearing in the corresponding lesson transcripts. Using a token similarity ratio that tolerates minor morphological variation, this measure rewards instructor-consistent terminology while penalizing conceptual drift. Instructional Alignment bridges Developing Models of Procedural Skills using an AI-assisted Text-to-Model Approach arXiv Preprint, , 

Figure 1: Human-in-the-loop text-to-model architecture illustrating schema-constrained generation and iterative refinement. 

structural correctness and semantic fidelity by verifying that ex-tracted entities are both formally represented in TMK syntax and grounded in the instructional materials, reducing the risk of in-structionally misaligned abstractions. 

Structural Binding . We assess the interconnections between each component of a TMK model (Task-Method-Knowledge) across three dimensions: (1) Task-Method binding: proportion of tasks with at least one associated method, (2) Method–Knowledge binding: percentage of method parameter types defined in the Knowledge graph, and (3) Task–Knowledge binding: consistency of input/output types between task definitions and knowledge concepts. These checks ensure that models are not merely syntactically valid JSON artifacts, but coherent procedural structures with con-sistent cross-component references. 

Procedural Heuristics . We additionally measure structural properties indicative of procedural completeness: (1) Guard Logic :percentage of transitions containing non-trivial conditions, (2) Fail-ure Modeling : presence of explicitly defined failure states when instructionally relevant, and (3) Hierarchy Depth : maximum invoca-tion depth in the task–method decomposition tree. These heuristics operationalize whether a model meaningfully encodes causal tran-sitions, hierarchical structure, and edge-case reasoning, central properties of procedural skill representation. For example, Guard Logic captures transitions governed by sub-stantive data conditions rather than trivial existence checks, such as: 

{"sourceState": "SNS_S5", "targetState": "SNS_Done", "dataCondition": "stereochemistryAssigned(config) || noStereoPresent(config)" }

Similarly, Failure Modeling detects explicitly defined failure states, e.g.: 

{"name": "SLM_Fail", "goalInvocation": { "goalReference": "FailureGoal", "type": "task", "actualArguments": [] }}

Hierarchy Depth reflects multi-level task decomposition, such as: 

Top-level Task: SystematicNamingSolution - Method: PrincipalGroupMechanism - Subtask: ParentNamingMechanism - Atomic Operation: NameHydrideChainOrRing 

This illustrates a n-level decomposition, evidencing hierarchical structuring of procedural knowledge. 

## 4.2 Semantic Evaluation: Similarity-Based Comparisons 

Syntactic correctness does not guarantee semantic adequacy. We therefore conduct structured pairwise similarity analyses across three comparisons for a given procedural skill: 

• Raw TMK vs. Expert-Crafted Baseline . We compare Raw TMKs to manual expert-crated models which serve as a ref-erence approximation of “ground truth”. This measures the initial quality of AI-generated drafts before refinement. arXiv Preprint, , Rahul K. Dass, Shubham Puri, Arpit Khandelwal, Xiao Jin, and Ashok K. Goel 

• Raw TMK vs. Refined TMK . We compare Raw TMKs to their corresponding Refined versions. The magnitude of change between these states indicates the degree of struc-tural and semantic adjustment required and serves as an indirect proxy for refinement effort. 

• Same Inputs, Two Generations . We generate Raw TMKs multiple times with identical inputs and prompts and com-pute similarity across sessions. This measures generation sta-bility and evaluates whether ontology-constrained prompt-ing reduces variance across runs. For each comparison, we compute cosine similarity at the level of Task, Method, and Knowledge components. Because per-field scores are not symmetric, we compute similarity in both input permutations and report averaged scores. Results are aggregated per-JSON model and per-field. These comparisons allow us to assess draft quality, refinement magnitude, and generative stability in a principled and transparent manner. 

## 4.3 LLM-Assisted Semantic Evaluation 

Certain dimensions of procedural reasoning such as causal chaining between states or teleological clarity, are not fully captured by (rule-based) structural checks. Therefore, we used an “LLM-as-judge” 1

evaluation approach to compare TMKs with instructional input materials (like video lesson transcripts). Each model was scored on a 1-5 Likert scale (normalized to [0, 1]) across three dimensions: 

• Causal Chaining : Whether state transitions reflect domain-specific mechanisms rather than abstract placeholders. 

• Teleological Linkage : Clarity of goal decomposition and Task-Method alignment. 

• Procedural Fidelity : Representation of algorithmic struc-ture, including loops and edge cases described in the lesson. We use these scores comparatively (Raw TMK vs. Refined TMK) rather than as absolute measures of correctness. 

## 4.4 Expert Refinement Time and Effort 

The central bottleneck in a human-in-the-loop pipeline is refine-ment time. For each procedural skill, expert developers recorded the time required to transform a Raw TMK model into a deployment-ready 2 Refined TMK model. These measurements were compared against prior estimates of fully manual model construction time prior to TTM adoption. Modeling reduction effort is computed as: Reduction = Manual Time − Refinement Time Manual Time This directly addresses the scalability criteria in our RQ (Section 1): whether AI-assisted TTM meaningfully lowers the human cost of constructing structured procedural representations. 

## 4.5 Refinement Areas. 

Finally, we qualitatively analyze recurring refinement patterns across skills. These include missing or incomplete guard conditions, 

> 1We used a GPT-4o model prompted with explicit evaluation rubrics aligned to TMK semantics to reduce subjectivity.
> 2Deployable TMK models are used by an AI tutor to provide structured procedural explanations with actual learners.

under-specified failure states, and teleological misalignment be-tween Tasks and Methods. Such patterns reveal both the strengths and limitations of our TTM methodology. 

## 5 Results 5.1 Structural Validity and Instructional Grounding 

We developed 24 TMK models using the TTM methodology and evaluated them using the framework described above. Twenty-three models represent skills from an online AI course that serves our primary case study, where structured AI tutoring will be deployed; one additional model from Chemistry was included to probe prelim-inary cross-domain applicability. We treat this cross-domain case as exploratory rather than evidence of domain-agnostic generality. All generated TMK artifacts achieved syntactic validity. Every model conformed to the TMK JSON schemata with no parsing fail-ures, missing fields, or type violations. This indicates that schema-complete template scaffolding reliably produces structurally valid models, minimizing low-level correction during refinement. 

Table 4: Comparative evaluation of Raw and Refined TMK models. Semantic scores are normalized to [0, 1].                                   

> Category Metric Raw Refined Abs. Diff Instructional Alignment Score 0.67 0.82 +0.15 Structural T-M Binding 0.45 0.95 +0.50 M-K Binding 0.14 0.35 +0.21 T-K Binding 0.28 0.40 +0.12 Procedural Guard Logic 0.97 0.99 +0.02 Failure Modeling 0.68 0.66 -0.02 Hierarchy Depth 2.00 2.41 +0.41 Semantic Causal Chaining 0.69 0.81 +0.12 Teleological Reasoning 0.72 0.82 +0.10 Procedural Fidelity 0.67 0.79 +0.12

Instructional Alignment improved from 0.67 (Raw) to 0.82 (Re-fined), indicating that expert iteration strengthens lexical ground-ing in instructor-specific terminology and reduces conceptual drift (Table 4). Structural binding improved substantially after refine-ment, particularly in Task–Method (+0.50) and Method–Knowledge (+0.21) connectivity, reflecting tighter TMK model cohesion be-tween its components after refinement. Although Raw models scored highly on Guard Logic (0.97), semantic measures show consistent gains in Causal Chaining (+0.12) and Procedural Fi-delity (+0.12), suggesting that expert intervention enhances domain-specific specificity rather than merely increasing structural com-plexity. Failure Modeling decreased slightly, as generic failure states were removed when not instructionally warranted. 

## 5.2 Semantic Similarity: Pairwise Comparisons 

Focusing solely on the 23 AI-domain skills from our case study, we report similarity-based results for the three comparisons defined in Section 4.2. 

Raw TMK vs. Expert Baselines . Across 23 skills, Raw TMKs exhibit strong overall mean cosine similarity with expert-crafted models: Task (0.79), Method (0.85), and Knowledge (0.71), as shown Developing Models of Procedural Skills using an AI-assisted Text-to-Model Approach arXiv Preprint, , 

Table 5: Semantic similarity: Expert baselines vs. Raw TMKs, averaged over ( 𝑛 = 23 ) models.                      

> TMK component Metric Mean SD Task Overall 0.79 0.08 Per-Field 0.61 0.38 Dict-Symmetric 0.61 0.03 Method Overall 0.85 0.10 Per-Field 0.59 0.38 Dict-Symmetric 0.61 0.06 Knowledge Overall 0.71 0.11 Per-Field 0.29 0.32 Dict-Symmetric 0.31 0.08

in Table 5. While overall alignment is high, particularly for the Method component, per-field and symmetric scores are substan-tially lower, especially for Knowledge, indicating variability in fine-grained structural and lexical alignment. These results suggest that the TTM pipeline meaningfully captures the high-level procedural structure of expert models, while refinement focuses primarily on increasing lexical grounding and relational specificity rather than reconstructing procedural structure from scratch. 

Generation Stability Under Fixed Inputs . To assess the repro-ducibility of the LLM-based TTM pipeline, we regenerated ( 𝑛 = 9)models with identical inputs and prompts. Results in Table 6 show near-perfect stability across Task, Method, and Knowledge com-ponents, with overall similarity scores of 1.00 and per-field scores consistently above 0.90. This indicates that ontology-constrained prompting and schema templates yield highly reproducible outputs under fixed conditions. Stability is an important property for scal-able authoring workflows, ensuring consistent drafts for instructors and developers. 

Table 6: Semantic similarity: Same inputs in two sessions. Averaged over ( 𝑛 = 9) models.                      

> TMK Component Metric Mean SD Task Overall 1.00 0.00 Per-Field 0.90 0.10 Dict-Symmetric 0.90 0.00 Method Overall 1.00 0.00 Per-Field 0.99 0.00 Dict-Symmetric 0.99 0.00 Knowledge Overall 1.00 0.00 Per-Field 1.00 0.00 Dict-Symmetric 1.00 0.00

## 5.3 Raw vs. Refined TMKs: Refinement Magnitude and Authoring Effort 

For a subset of five skills that underwent full expert refinement (𝑛 = 5), we compared Raw TMK drafts to their refined, deployment-ready counterparts. Overall cosine similarity remained high across components: Task (0.90), Method (0.91), and Knowledge (0.89), as shown in Table 7. These results indicate that Raw TMK drafts generally capture the intended high-level conceptual structure of each skill. However, 

Table 7: Semantic similarity: Raw TMKs vs. Refined TMKs, averaged over ( 𝑛 = 5) models.                      

> TMK Component Metric Mean SD Task Overall 0.90 0.13 Per-Field 0.78 0.28 Dict-Symmetric 0.78 0.13 Method Overall 0.91 0.06 Per-Field 0.76 0.26 Dict-Symmetric 0.76 0.07 Knowledge Overall 0.89 0.05 Per-Field 0.60 0.37 Dict-Symmetric 0.66 0.28

lower per-field and semantic similarity scores, particularly for the Knowledge component, reveal variability at finer structural levels. This pattern suggests that refinement consists primarily of localized but structurally significant edits rather than full model reconstruc-tion. Common revisions included tightening guard conditions, de-composing underspecified subtasks, adding missing transitions, and correcting type bindings to better align with instructional intent. To quantify reduced authoring effort, the same five models were timed during expert refinement. Prior to TTM adoption, manual TMK construction averaged 6–7 hours per skill. Under the TTM workflow, refinement required a mean of 1.9 hours (median 2.0 hours; SD 0.42 hours), representing roughly a two-thirds reduction in expert modeling time. Together, the high structural similarity between Raw and Refined models and the substantial reduction in refinement time indicate that TTM meaningfully lowers the human effort required to con-struct structured procedural representations. Expert labor shifts from drafting core structure to targeted semantic correction, sup-porting scalability while preserving instructional fidelity. 

## 5.4 Refinement Patterns and Cross-Domain Illustration 

Across Refined TMKs, we observe consistent refinement patterns that clarify where expert effort is concentrated: 

• Strong structural scaffolding: Raw drafts reliably satisfy TMK structure and provide usable high-level decompositions. 

• Incomplete procedural decomposition: Multi-step operations may be collapsed or underspecified, requiring deeper hierar-chical breakdown. 

• Guard conditions and edge cases: Preconditions are often present but require tightening to correctly handle bypass cases and boundary conditions. 

• Error propagation across components: Incomplete task de-compositions frequently propagate to Method finite-state machines (FSMs) and Knowledge assertions. 

• Retrieval artifacts: Section and figure references from source materials may appear and must be removed. 

• Usability considerations: Editing JSON and maintaining FSM consistency may introduce cognitive load, particularly for non-programmers. arXiv Preprint, , Rahul K. Dass, Shubham Puri, Arpit Khandelwal, Xiao Jin, and Ashok K. Goel 

To probe preliminary cross-domain applicability, we applied the pipeline to an organic chemistry procedural skill (IUPAC nomen-clature). Consistent with AI-domain results, the Raw draft was structurally valid and provided a strong initial decomposition. Re-finement focused on correcting domain-specific edge cases, tighten-ing preconditions, and adding missing hierarchical and relational constraints required by the procedure. We treat this single non-CS example as an exploratory cross-domain probe rather than evidence of full domain-agnostic model-ing. Broader cross-domain validation remains future work. 

## 6 Discussion 

Our findings demonstrate that LLM-assisted generations substan-tially accelerate the construction of TMK ontological models. Across 24 models, the TTM pipeline reduced authoring time from approxi-mately 6-7 hours per skill to an average of about 2 hours, represent-ing roughly a two-thirds reduction in expert effort. This reduction is not merely quantitative; it reshapes the authoring process by allowing experts to focus on higher-order semantic refinements rather than structural scaffolding. Evaluation results show that Raw TMK drafts consistently cap-ture high-level procedural structure and content. The Task and Method components exhibit strong overall semantic similarity to expert-crafted models, while syntactic validity is achieved in all cases through schema-constrained prompting. Structural binding and instructional alignment improve substantially after refinement, indicating that expert effort concentrates on tightening relational consistency and grounding terminology in lesson-specific language rather than reconstructing models from scratch. Interestingly, the TTM methodology consistently produced com-ponents in the order Knowledge → Task → Method. Although not explicitly required, this ordering reflects the epistemic structure embedded in the TMK specification: domain knowledge informs cognitive tasks, which in turn decompose into executable meth-ods. The generation sequence suggests that ontology-constrained prompting implicitly mirrors the hierarchical logic of procedural skill representation. Despite these strengths, expert refinement remains essential. The most significant editing effort is devoted to decomposing tasks into atomic operations, tightening guard logic, and correcting FSM transitions. Occasional omissions in edge-case handling and rela-tional constraints highlight current limitations of LLM abstraction. However, because syntactic correctness is guaranteed by schema-complete templates, refinement effort shifts from structural drafting to semantic precision. The depth of hierarchical decomposition (i.e., Task → Method →

... → Task → Knowledge) and whether multiple solution methods can be applied to solve a single Task are influenced by the expert’s representational choices, not solely by objective properties of the underlying domain. The TTM pipeline currently inherits abstrac-tion biases from both instructional materials and LLM priors. Future work must investigate mechanisms for controlling representational granularity and supporting alternative method encodings. This division of labor aligns with a System 1 / System 2 framing [18 ]: rapid structural completion by the LLM followed by deliber-ate expert validation. More broadly, the TMK schemata constrain LLM output during authoring in much the same way that TMK models constrain LLM inferencing during tutoring [ 26 , 8 , 25 ]. In both cases, unstructured information is transformed into explicit relational structure, preserving domain relationships while making them computationally operable. Taken together, these findings directly address our research ques-tion from Section 1. AI-assisted TTM does not eliminate expert in-volvement, but it meaningfully reduces the manual effort required to construct structured procedural representations suitable for scal-able AI tutoring systems. 

## 7 Limitations 

Despite significant gains in authoring efficiency, several limitations remain. First, although hallucinations were relatively rare, occasional conceptual errors propagated across components. For example, a mis-specified Task often required corresponding corrections in the Method and Knowledge components. Such cascading errors highlight the fragility of automated ontology construction and reinforce the necessity of expert validation prior to deployment. Second, decomposition depth was consistently limited in Raw TMK drafts. Although Tasks were typically broken into subtasks, deeper hierarchical decomposition (e.g., to subsubtasks and atomic operations) often required expert intervention. This constrains the granularity of procedural fidelity achievable through automated drafting alone. Third, logical gaps were occasionally observed in FSM struc-tures, particularly around edge-case handling and failure condi-tions. These limitations resemble those seen in LLM-based code generation and underscore that initial drafts should be treated as structured approximations rather than deployment-ready artifacts. Finally, the quality and genre of instructional materials likely influence the quality of Raw TMKs. Because our case study relied primarily on lecture transcripts, it remains unclear how the pipeline would perform when applied to textbooks, standards documents, or peer-reviewed articles, which may differ in structure, completeness, and procedural explicitness. 

## 8 Future Work 

Future work proceeds along three complementary directions: scal-ability, generality, and tooling. First, while this study demonstrates significant reductions in authoring effort within a single course domain, broader curricular coverage remains a central goal. Extending the TTM pipeline to additional courses/domains and instructional contexts will allow us to evaluate how well ontology-constrained authoring scales across varied procedural skill types. In parallel, system-level evaluations of structured AI tutoring will assess how improvements in model authoring translate into explanation quality and learner outcomes, providing an end-to-end view of impact. Second, methodological refinement remains important. Although schema-constrained prompting guarantees syntactic validity, de-composition depth and edge-case modeling still require expert intervention. Future work will explore prompting and workflow refinements that better encourage atomic operation decomposition, explicit failure modeling, and multiple-method task representations. Developing Models of Procedural Skills using an AI-assisted Text-to-Model Approach arXiv Preprint, , 

Beyond prompt design, we are investigating TMK grammar-based parsers and compiler-like tools that operate over TMK models to support state tracking and procedural inference (e.g., determining the next valid step given a problem state). Such capabilities would strengthen the link between structured authoring and runtime tu-toring. Third, generality remains an open research question. While preliminary cross-domain modeling (e.g., IUPAC nomenclature in organic chemistry) suggests transferability, systematic valida-tion across domains is needed. Procedural skills vary substantially in abstraction, evaluation criteria, and representational structure. For example, how might modeling requirements differ between clinical nursing procedures and cybersecurity incident response workflows? Skills involving interpretive judgment, creative design, or loosely structured problem-solving may challenge ontology-constrained representations and require extensions to the frame-work. Finally, usability improvements are essential for broader adop-tion. The current workflow requires direct JSON editing and FSM inspection, which may impose cognitive load on non-programmers. Developing graphical or schema-aware editing interfaces would preserve expert control while lowering the barrier to entry, mak-ing scalable structured authoring feasible for instructors without formal AI training.. 

## 9 Conclusion 

The study demonstrates that AI-assisted TTM methods can mean-ingfully lower the barrier to constructing TMK models at scale. By leveraging LLMs to generate syntactically valid first drafts within ontology-constrained templates and embedding expert review into the workflow, we achieved substantial reductions in authoring time while preserving representational fidelity. High-level procedural ab-stractions (tasks, methods, logical constraints, domain knowledge structures), were reliably captured, with expert oversight concen-trated on hierarchical composition depth, causal chaining, and FSM logic rather than structural reconstruction. The dual-process framing of the pipeline - rapid structural com-pletion (System 1 thinking) followed by deliberate expert validation (System 2) - proved effective in balancing efficiency with accuracy. Schema scaffolding eliminated malformed outputs, semantic simi-larity analyses revealed strong alignment between Raw TMK drafts and expert models, and LLM generation stability ensured repro-ducibility under fixed inputs. Together, these properties support scalable authoring workflows suitable for structured AI tutoring systems in large online courses. At the same time, important limitations remain. Occasional hallu-cinations, error propagation across components, and depth-limited decomposition underscore the continued necessity of expert over-sight. Broader cross-domain evaluation is required before stronger claims of generality can be made, and improved authoring interfaces will be essential for adoption by non-programmers. AI assistance does not replace expert modeling; rather, it shifts expert effort toward higher-value semantic refinement. Looking forward, the pipeline offers a foundation for extending explicit structured TMK model coverage across courses, explor-ing alternative levels of knowledge abstraction, and developing accessible tooling to democratize ontology-based authoring. Situat-ing generative AI within an explicit, expert-guided, ontologically constrained workflow advances a practical path toward scalable, reliable neuro-symbolic AI tutoring systems capable of supporting procedural skill learning at scale. 

## Acknowledgments 

Removed for double-blind review 

## References 

[1] Vincent Aleven, Bruce M McLaren, Jonathan Sewall, Martin Van Velsen, Octav Popescu, Sandra Demi, Michael Ringenberg, and Kenneth R Koedinger. 2016. Example-tracing tutors: Intelligent tutor development for non-programmers. 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 26, 1 (2016), 224–269. [2] Mona Alshahrani, Maha A Thafar, and Magbubah Essack. 2021. Application and evaluation of knowledge graph embeddings in biomedical data. PeerJ Computer Science 7 (2021), e341. [3] Balakrishnan Chandrasekaran. 1986. Generic tasks in knowledge-based reason-ing: High-level building blocks for expert system design. IEEE Intelligent Systems 

1, 03 (1986), 23–30. [4] Balakrishnan Chandrasekaran, Todd R Johnson, and Jack W Smith. 1992. Task-structure analysis for knowledge modeling. Commun. ACM 35, 9 (1992), 124–137. [5] Yupeng Chang, Xu Wang, Jindong Wang, Yuan Wu, Linyi Yang, Kaijie Zhu, Hao Chen, Xiaoyuan Yi, Cunxiang Wang, Yidong Wang, et al . 2024. A survey on evaluation of large language models. ACM transactions on intelligent systems and technology 15, 3 (2024), 1–45. [6] Bohan Chen and Andrea L. Bertozzi. 2023. AutoKG: Efficient Automated Knowl-edge Graph Generation for Language Models. In 2023 IEEE International Confer-ence on Big Data (BigData) . 3117–3126. https://doi.org/10.1109/BigData59044. 2023.10386454 [7] Rahul Dass, Thomas Bowlin, Zebing Li, Xiao Jin, and Ashok Goel. 2025. Improving Procedural Skill Explanations via Constrained Generation: A Symbolic-LLM Hybrid Architecture. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.20942 (2025). [8] Rahul K Dass, Rochan H Madhusudhana, Erin C Deye, Shashank Verma, Timo-thy A Bydlon, Grace Brazil, and Ashok K Goel. 2025. Ivy: a hybrid knowledge-based and generative AI coach for explaining procedural skills. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education . Springer, 233–246. [9] Yuxin Dong, Jian Bai, Mei Li, and Wei Zhang. 2024. Large Language Models in Education: A Systematic Review. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies 17, 3 (2024), 123–145. https://doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2024.10589960 [10] Kutluhan Erol, James Hendler, and Dana S Nau. 1994. HTN planning: Complexity and expressivity. In AAAI , Vol. 94. 1123–1128. [11] Mikhail Galkin, Xinyu Yuan, Hesham Mostafa, Jian Tang, and Zhaocheng Zhu. 2024. Towards Foundation Models for Knowledge Graph Reasoning. arXiv:2310.04562 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.04562 [12] Aldo Gangemi, Carola Catenacci, Massimiliano Ciaramita, and Jos Lehmann. 2006. Modelling ontology evaluation and validation. In European semantic web conference . Springer, 140–154. [13] Mingqi Gao, Xinyu Hu, Xunjian Yin, Jie Ruan, Xiao Pu, and Xiaojun Wan. 2025. Llm-based nlg evaluation: Current status and challenges. Computational Linguis-tics (2025), 1–27. [14] Ashok K Goel and Spencer Rugaber. 2017. GAIA: A CAD-like environment for designing game-playing agents. IEEE Intelligent Systems 32, 3 (2017), 60–67. [15] Hai Hoang, Stephen Lee-Urban, and Héctor Muñoz-Avila. 2005. Hierarchical plan representations for encoding strategic game ai. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment , Vol. 1. 63–68. [16] Pengcheng Jiang, Lang Cao, Cao Xiao, Parminder Bhatia, Jimeng Sun, and Jiawei Han. 2024. KG-FIT: Knowledge Graph Fine-Tuning Upon Open-World Knowledge. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .https://openreview.net/forum?id=rDoPMODpki [17] Martin Josifoski, Nicola De Cao, Maxime Peyrard, Fabio Petroni, and Robert West. 2022. GenIE: Generative Information Extraction. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , Marine Carpuat, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, and Ivan Vladimir Meza Ruiz (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Seattle, United States, 4626–4643. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022. naacl-main.342 [18] Daniel Kahneman. 2011. Thinking, fast and slow. Farrar, Straus and Giroux 

(2011). [19] Kenneth R Koedinger and Vincent Aleven. 2007. Exploring the assistance dilemma in experiments with cognitive tutors. Educational psychology review 19, 3 (2007), 239–264. arXiv Preprint, , Rahul K. Dass, Shubham Puri, Arpit Khandelwal, Xiao Jin, and Ashok K. Goel 

[20] Kenneth R. Koedinger and Albert T. Corbett. 2006. Cognitive Tutors: Technology bringing learning science to the classroom. In The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences , R. Keith Sawyer (Ed.). Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, 61–78. [21] Kenneth R Koedinger, Albert T Corbett, and Charles Perfetti. 2012. The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction framework: Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive science 36, 5 (2012), 757–798. [22] Stephen Lee-Urban and Héctor Muñoz-Avila. [n. d.]. A Study of Process Lan-guages for Planning Tasks. ICAPS 2006 ([n. d.]), 65. [23] Angélique Létourneau, Marion Deslandes Martineau, Patrick Charland, John Alexander Karran, Jared Boasen, and Pierre Majorique Léger. 2025. Asystematic review of AI-driven intelligent tutoring systems (ITS) in K-12 educa-tion. npj Science of Learning 10, 1 (2025), 29. [24] Zixuan Li, Yutao Zeng, Yuxin Zuo, Weicheng Ren, Wenxuan Liu, Miao Su, Yucan Guo, Yantao Liu, Xiang Li, Zhilei Hu, Long Bai, Wei Li, Yidan Liu, Pan Yang, Xiaolong Jin, Jiafeng Guo, and Xueqi Cheng. 2024. KnowCoder: Coding Structured Knowledge into LLMs for Universal Information Extraction. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Bangkok, Thailand, 8758–8779. https://doi.org/ 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.475 [25] Cherie Lum, Erin Deye, Grace Brazil, Tim Bydlon, Shashank Verma, Rochan Madhusudhana, Rahul Dass, and Ashok Goel. 2025. Designing an AI coaching system for interactive video-based skill learning. In International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems . Springer, 281–291. [26] J William Murdock and Ashok K Goel. 2008. Meta-case-based reasoning: self-improvement through self-understanding. Journal of Experimental \& Theoretical Artificial Intelligence 20, 1 (2008), 1–36. [27] Tom Murray. 2003. An Overview of Intelligent Tutoring System Authoring Tools: Updated analysis of the state of the art. Authoring tools for advanced technology learning environments: Toward cost-effective adaptive, interactive and intelligent educational software (2003), 491–544. [28] Tom Murray. 2003. An Overview of Intelligent Tutoring System Authoring Tools: Updated Analysis of the State of the Art . Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 491– 544. [29] Dana S Nau, Tsz-Chiu Au, Okhtay Ilghami, Ugur Kuter, J William Murdock, Dan Wu, and Fusun Yaman. 2003. SHOP2: An HTN planning system. Journal of artificial intelligence research 20 (2003), 379–404. [30] Rohan Patel, Emily Fox, John Williams, and Linh Nguyen. 2023. Can Large Language Models Generate Middle School Mathematics Explanations Better than Human Teachers?. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association . Chicago, IL. Preprint available from the National Science Foundation award repository. [31] Bárbara Rodrigues, Rui Pinto, and Gil Gonçalves. 2025. A Systematic Literature Review of AI-Driven Intelligent Tutoring Systems in Engineering Education: Emphasizing Personalization, Feedback, and Student Monitoring. IEEE Access 13 (2025), 190152–190177. [32] Khusniddin R Ruzimboev, Ikhtiyor D Avezmatov, and Boburjon I Shermatov. 2025. A Review of Neuro-Symbolic, Multi-Modal Intelligent Tutoring Systems for Advancing Adaptive and Personalized Learning. In 2025 10th International Conference on Computer Science and Engineering (UBMK) . IEEE, 148–153. [33] Anubhav Shrimal, Aryan Jain, Soumyajit Chowdhury, and Promod Yenigalla. 2025. PARSE: LLM Driven Schema Optimization for Reliable Entity Extraction. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track , Saloni Potdar, Lina Rojas-Barahona, and Sebastien Montella (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Suzhou (China), 2749– 2763. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.emnlp-industry.184 [34] Robert Sottilare, Arthur Graesser, Xiangen Hu, and Keith Brawner. 2015. De-sign recommendations for intelligent tutoring systems: Authoring tools and expert modeling techniques . Robert Sottilare. [35] Eleni Stroulia and Ashok K Goel. 1999. Evaluating PSMs in evolutionary design: The A UTOGNOSTIC experiments. International journal of human-computer studies 51, 4 (1999), 825–847. [36] Kurt VanLehn. 2006. The Behavior of Tutoring Systems. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 16, 3 (2006), 227–265. https://doi.org/10.3233/ IRG-2006-16(3)02 [37] Zhihao Wen, Sheng Liang, Yaxiong Wu, Yongyue Zhang, and Yong Liu. 2025. Effective and efficient schema-aware information extraction using on-device large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14992 (2025). [38] Antonio Zaitoun, Tomer Sagi, and Mor Peleg. 2024. Generating Ontology-Learning Training-Data through Verbalization. Proceedings of the AAAI Sympo-sium Series 4, 1 (Nov. 2024), 233–241. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaaiss.v4i1.31797 [39] Yue Zhang, Yafu Li, Leyang Cui, Deng Cai, Lemao Liu, Tingchen Fu, Xinting Huang, Enbo Zhao, Yu Zhang, Yulong Chen, et al . 2025. Siren’s Song in the AI Ocean: A Survey on Hallucination in Large Language Models. Computational Linguistics 51, 4 (2025), 1373–1418. [40] Panpan Zhou, Zhengyong Zhang, and Fan Yang. 2025. Knowledge Graphs towards AI-assisted Smart Education. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Intelligent Education and Computer Technology . 866–871. 

Received xx Month 20xx; revised xx Month 20xx; accepted xx Month 20xx