Title: Skeleton-and-Strategy Prompting: Training-Free Negation Understanding for Vision-Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.01180v1

Published Time: Fri, 02 Oct 2026 01:08:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# Skeleton-and-Strategy Prompting: Training-Free Negation Understanding for Vision-Language Models 

Yuliang Cai caiyulia@usc.edu Viterbi School of Engineering University of Southern California 

Mohammad Rostami rostamii@amazon.com Amazon Inc. 

Jesse Thomason jessetho@usc.edu Viterbi School of Engineering University of Southern California 

# Abstract 

Despite the strong performance of Vision-Language Models (VLMs) on a wide range of visual question answering (VQA) tasks, these models consistently struggle to understand negation and produce incorrect answers when questions involve negated clauses. To ad-dress this limitation, we propose Skeleton-and-Strategy Prompting ( SSP ), a training-free, in-context learning method that improves VLM negation understanding capabilities without any parameter updates. Given a negation question, our method first abstracts the under-lying question structure into a skeleton, retrieves a small set of same-skeleton questions from a lightweight question pool, then prompts the VLM to analyze their shared negation pattern and synthesize a single-sentence answering strategy. The skeleton and strategy are prepended to the test sample to guide the model correctly tackle the negation problems. Experiments on multiple negation VQA benchmarks show that SSP achieves state-of-the-art performance on negation-focused VQA tasks while remaining computationally efficient. 

# 1 Introduction 

Vision-language models (VLMs) have shown strong performance across a wide range of visual question answering (VQA) tasks, demonstrating their ability to reason about complex visual scenes from natural language instructions. However, these models lack the concrete understanding of negation , which is a fundamental component of the human language, enabling the expression of absence, exclusion, and logical opposition in everyday communication. Visual question answering tasks can include negation, for example 

"Is there a dog in the image but no cat?" or "Which objects are not on the table?" When a VLM fails to understand negation, it tends to respond as if the negation were absent, producing incorrect answers that undermine the model’s reliability. Existing studies in the negation understanding of VLMs have only primarily focused on CLIP-based mod-els (Radford et al., 2021) that use image-text alignment tasks where the objective is to measure similarity between global image and text representations. In this setting, handling negation is typically framed as distinguishing between matching and non-matching pairs, without requiring deeper compositional or logical reasoning. These methods rely on implicit learning signals within the contrastive framework and do not explicitly model the semantics of negation, limiting their ability to capture fine-grained logical distinctions beyond surface-level mismatches. Moreover, most existing approaches adopt full-model fine-tuning to adapt CLIP to negation-aware tasks (Cai et al., 2025; Park et al., 2025; Singh et al., 2024; Yuksekgonul et al., 2023), which can be computationally expensive and inefficient when finetuning large pretrained models. 1arXiv:2610.01180v1 [cs.CV] 1 Oct 2026 Figure 1: Comparison of prompting methods under the negation scenario. Given the same negation question to VLMs, the plain prompt and rule-based prompt both produce the answers which align with the visual content. Our Skeleton-and-Strategy Prompting (SSP) extracts the question skeleton and applies a negation-aware strategy, guiding the model to choose the option that differs from the visual content, which is the correct answer for the negation question. To address the lack of negation understanding methods in the reasoning task, we propose an efficient, training-free method for enhancing negation understanding in vision-language models for visual question answering, a setting that requires reasoning not about what is present but about what is absent (Figure 1). We show that negation VQA can be treated as a structure-sensitive reasoning problem. In many cases, a pretrained VLM already has the knowledge needed to answer the question, such as recognizing the objects, attributes, or relations in the image. However, the model may still fail because it does not correctly interpret the negated sentence pattern. Thus, we introduce Skeleton-and-Strategy Prompting ( SSP ): given a negation question, we first abstract its underlying structure into a skeleton (e.g., "What is not [X]?" ), retrieve a small set of same-skeleton questions from a lightweight question pool, and prompt the VLM to analyze their shared negation pattern and synthesize a single-sentence answering strategy, which is a concise instruction that tells the VLM how to interpret the negaiton structure and select the correct answer. Prepending this skeleton and strategy to the prompt containing the test sample helps the model correctly handle the negation. Because SSP caches the skeleton and pool, as inference proceeds SSP is able to re-use previously calculated skeletons when new questions match them, reducing computational overhead. Experimental results demonstrate that 

SSP improves negation understanding in VQA tasks while maintaining minimal overhead. 22 Related Works 

Our work lies at the intersection of two research directions: in-context learning for visual question answer-ing and negation understanding in vision-language models. Multimodal in-context learning demonstrates how VLMs can adapt at inference time, but existing approaches typically rely on instance-level demonstra-tions rather than reusable abstractions of the underlying reasoning structure. Meanwhile, prior work on visual negation has shown that VLMs consistently struggle to interpret negated inputs, but has focused primarily on image–text alignment and training-based adaptation. These limitations motivate SSP , which provides training-free guidance for negation reasoning by converting shared question structures into reusable skeleton–strategy prompts. 

2.1 In-Context Learning for Visual Question Answering 

In-context learning (ICL) enables large models to adapt to new tasks through demonstrations provided at inference time, eliminating the need for parameter updates (Brown et al., 2020). Building on this paradigm, multimodal models such as Frozen (Tsimpoukelli et al., 2021) and Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022) extend few-shot in-context learning to vision-language tasks, conditioning on interleaved image-text exemplars to guide reasoning at inference time without any gradient updates. Beyond general-purpose multimodal ICL, a separate line of work has targeted training-free prompting strate-gies specifically for VQA. PICa (Yang et al., 2021) showed that large language models can answer visual questions using image captions and a small set of demonstrations. PNP-VQA (Tiong et al., 2022) further leveraged caption generation and language-model reasoning to perform zero-shot VQA. Subsequent works explored prompt engineering, chain-of-thought reasoning, and multimodal rationale generation to improve visual reasoning (Kojima et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2024; Shao et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2023). More re-cent studies examined multimodal demonstration selection and evaluation, highlighting the importance of exemplar quality and retrieval strategies in multimodal ICL (Zhao et al., 2024; Zong et al., 2024). Despite these advances, existing approaches primarily transfer knowledge through explicit examples, requir-ing the model to infer the underlying reasoning pattern from retrieved demonstrations. This limitation is particularly significant for negation VQA, where success depends on correctly interpreting linguistic struc-tures such as exclusion, absence, or contradiction. SSP addresses this gap by explicitly extracting the shared negation-aware structure of related questions and converting it into a reusable reasoning strategy, thereby removing the need for the VLM to infer the reasoning pattern solely from instance-level demonstrations. 

2.2 Negation Understanding for VLM 

Negation is a fundamental linguistic phenomenon that has long posed challenges for natural language process-ing systems. From the perspective of language-only models, existing work has demonstrated that pretrained language models fail to distinguish between negated and non-negated queries (Kassner & Schütze, 2020; Ettinger, 2020). LLMs have also been evaluated systematically via negation-focused benchmarks (Truong et al., 2023; García-Ferrero et al., 2023), showing that LLMs exhibit several limitations to the presence of negation, an inability to capture the lexical semantics of negation, and a failure to reason under negation. On the other hand, the study of negation in VLMs is mainly focused on CLIP-based model (Radford et al., 2021). For example, Quantmeyer et al. conduct experiments and visualize where and how the CLIP model processes negation information in each layer. To encourage processing negation semantics, other methods adopt LLMs to generate negation captions based on existing image–text pair datasets to fine-tune CLIP for negation understanding (Alhamoud et al., 2025; Singh et al., 2024; Park et al., 2025; Yuksekgonul et al., 2023; Cai et al., 2025). However, the under-performance of negation is not only constrained in the CLIP-based model for image-text matching tasks, but widely exists in tasks which require more complicated reasoning, such as visual question answering. One study found that, in visual question answering with multiple choices, simply turning the question into a negated format (e.g. "What is in front of the door?" to "What is not in front of the door?" ) caused severe drops in state-of-the-art VLM accuracy (Zhang et al., 2025). 3Figure 2: Overview of Skeleton and Strategy Prompting (SSP). SSP first builds a negative example pool offline (top). At inference time, SSP extracts the question skeleton, retrieves or synthesizes a reusable reasoning strategy, and constructs the final prompt for the target VLM (bottom). We target improving the negation understanding for the visual question answering task. Instead of perform-ing full-model fine-tuning like the methods mentioned above, we propose a training-free in-context learning method, which leads to temporal and computational efficiency. 

# 3 Methodology 

We propose Skeleton and Strategy Prompting (SSP) , a training-free, inference-time framework for negation VQA (Figure 2). SSP is motivated by the observation that questions sharing the same negation-aware format usually require similar reasoning procedures. Instead of retrieving demonstrations for every test instance, SSP abstracts each question into a reusable skeleton and associates it with a reasoning strategy. In particular, SSP maintains a global example pool, D : s 7 → r, where s denotes the extracted skeleton, and 

r denotes the corresponding reasoning strategy. Given a test question, SSP first identifies its question type. If this type has already been stored in D, SSP directly reuses the cached skeleton and strategy. Otherwise, 

SSP extracts a new skeleton using a rule-based procedure and generates a new strategy using negative VQA samples from the example pool. 

3.1 Example Pool Construction 

To support the generation of question-specific strategies in SSP , we construct an example pool from an external VQA source. First, we randomly sample K visual question answering examples from the VQA-v2 dataset (Goyal et al., 2017). Each sampled example consists of an image, an original question, its corresponding pair of answer options, and the label for the correct answer. Since VQA-v2 mainly contains 4Algorithm 1 Question Skeleton Extraction                                                        

> Require: Negation question q
> Ensure: Question skeleton s
> Tokenize qand obtain the part-of-speech tag of each word Find the interrogative word or phrase wamong the first two words ▷e.g., what ,where ,which ,do , or is
> Find the negation word nin q▷e.g., not ,no , or without
> B←the words located between wand n
> if Bcontains a noun or noun phrase then
> Replace the noun or noun phrase in Bwith X
> end if
> Preserve any auxiliary or be verb in B▷e.g., is ,are ,do , or does
> A←the noun word following n
> if Aexists then
> Replace Awith Y
> end if
> s←the resulting question
> return s

standard positive-form questions, we use GPT-4o (OpenAI et al., 2024) to transform each sampled question into a negation-format question while preserving the original visual content and answer space. During this conversion, GPT-4o rewrites the question into a negative format, involving absence, exclusion, or incorrect attributes. We then swap the original correct answer label to the alternative among the binary pair from VQA-v2 to obtain the target answer for the negated question. In this way, each example in the pool contains a negative question-answer pair derived from an existing VQA instance. The resulting example pool provides diverse negation patterns and visual reasoning cases, which are later used by SSP to synthesize strategies for unseen test questions. This construction allows SSP to leverage broad visual-language knowledge from VQA-v2 without requiring additional model training or task-specific fine-tuning. 

3.2 Skeleton Extraction 

Given a negation question q at inference time, SSP transforms it into a structure-preserving skeleton s. The goal of skeleton extraction is to preserve the negation-aware question format while removing instance-specific semantic content. We first apply POS tagging and dependency parsing to identify the interrogative word, such as what , which , where , or how , and the negation operator, such as not , no , without . These tokens are preserved because they determine the question intent and the negated reasoning constraint. After locating the interrogative word and the negation operator, SSP replaces the semantic span between them with a placeholder X. It then replaces the word or phrase immediately following the negation operator with a placeholder Y. If there is no semantic span between the interrogative word and the negation operator, the word following the negation operator is instead replaced with X. Formally, this process removes question-specific objects, attributes, and actions while retaining the key interrogative and negation structure. For example, the question [ Which animal is not standing? ] is converted into the skeleton [ Which X is not Y? ], where X abstracts the queried visual entity and Y abstracts the negated action. The resulting skeleton serves as a question-type identifier and enables SSP to reuse reasoning strategies across questions with the same negation format as inference proceeds, reducing computational overhead. The algorithm of skeleton extraction is presented in Algorithm 1. 

3.3 Strategy Generation and Caching 

SSP maintains an example pool D that maps each skeleton with a corresponding strategy, D[s] = r, where 

s is the skeleton extracted from the question and r is the associated reasoning strategy. For a test question q, SSP first extracts its skeleton s. If s ∈ D , the corresponding cached r is retrieved directly. Otherwise, SSP samples N negative VQA pairs from a negative example pool. These examples are selected to share a similar negation-aware structure with the current question skeleton. The sampled 5Figure 3: Comparison of prompting methods on the NegVQA benchmark. Accuracy (%) is reported for six VLMs spanning commercial, 8B-level, and 2B-level models. SSP achieves the highest accuracy for every model, outperforming plain prompt, CoT negation and four-example in-context prompting, providing consistent gains across all evaluated model scales. examples are then provided to the VLM, which generates a concise one-sentence reasoning strategy describing how questions of this type should be solved. The generated strategy r is stored together with the skeleton s

in D for future reuse. The prompt to generate the strategy is presented in the Appendix A.1. This caching mechanism allows SSP to convert recurring question formats into reusable prompting units. As more question types are observed during inference, the example pool gradually accumulates skeleton-strategy pairs, reducing redundant strategy generation and improving inference efficiency. 

3.4 Skeleton and Strategy Prompting 

Given a test image I, question q, extracted skeleton s, and retrieved or generated strategy r, SSP constructs the final prompt as: [ Question Type: s ] [ Reasoning Strategy: r ] followed by the original image-question pair ( I, q ). The skeleton informs the VLM of the abstract negation-aware question format, while the strategy provides high-level reasoning guidance for answering questions of this type. The VLM then predicts the final answer conditioned on both the original visual-question input and the reusable skeleton-strategy prompt. Conceptually, SSP encourages the model to focus on the negated visual condition rather than relying only on surface-level linguistic cues or explicit demonstrations at test time. 

# 4 Experiments 

To evaluate the performance of SSP on negation VQA, we evaluate the proposed Skeleton and Strategy Prompting ( SSP ) framework on two benchmarks. First, we consider the NegVQA Zhang et al. (2025) benchmark, designed to test the negation understanding ability of vision-language models. It spans 20 widely-used VQA datasets across general, reasoning, OCR, and document and chart domains. We report accuracy as the evaluation metric. Second, we contribute and evaluate on the Diverse Negation VQA Benchmark (DNVQA) . We designed the DNVQA benchmark to evaluate the VLM’s negation understanding capacity on questions that do not explicitly state negation words like "not, no, without" . We generated 1000 negation VQA pairs via LLM and report accuracy as the evaluation metric (details in Appendix A.2). 6Figure 4: Comparison of prompting methods on the DNVQA benchmark. DNVQA evaluates implicit negation expressed without explicit markers such as not , no , or without . Accuracy (%) is reported for the same six VLMs evaluated on DNVQA. SSP achieves the highest accuracy for every model. These consistent gains show that SSP remains effective when negation is conveyed through diverse semantic ex-pressions rather than explicit lexical cues. We conduct experiments on three scales of VLMs. To represent large-scale models, we evaluate GPT-4o (OpenAI et al., 2024); for 8B-level models, we evaluate InternVL3-8B (Zhu et al., 2025), Qwen3VL-8B (Bai et al., 2025), and LLaVA-OneVision2-8B (An et al., 2026); and for 2B-level models, we evaluate 

InternVL3-2B (Zhu et al., 2025) and Qwen3VL-2B (Bai et al., 2025). This diverse set of VLMs allows us to examine whether SSP is effective across both large and lightweight VLMs. We compare our SSP with three prompting baselines. The first baseline is Plain Prompt , where the original negation question is directly given to the VLM without any additional guidance. The second baseline is CoT Negation , where we prepend a hand-written rule to the question: [ Rule: For each question, convert it into positive question by removing the negation word. Then answer the positive question. Finally, choose the alternative answer than the positive question’s answer. ] This baseline tests whether an explicit chain-of-thought-style negation rule can improve negation reasoning. The third baseline is Attach Sample to Prompt , where four negation question-answer examples are directly prepended before the test question as in-context demonstrations. 

4.1 SSP Outperforms Baselines on NegVQA and DNVQA 

Figure 3 shows the comparison results on the NegVQA benchmark. Overall, the proposed Skeleton + Strategy prompting method achieves the best performance across all evaluated models. Compared with Plain Prompt, SSP improves InternVL3-8B from 65.1 to 79.1, Qwen3VL-8B from 70.6 to 75.5, and LLaVA-OneVision2-8B from 73.2 to 76.3. Similar improvements are observed on the smaller 2B-level models, where 

SSP improves InternVL3-2B from 61.2 to 67.8 and Qwen3VL-2B from 51.0 to 54.4. The results suggest that directly asking VLMs negation questions is insufficient for robust negation understanding. Although these models have strong visual-language capabilities, they can still struggle to correctly handle negated 7Table 1: Ablation study on 8B-level VLMs using the NegVQA benchmark. SSP achieves the best average performance, showing that combining matched skeletons with reusable strategies is more effective than using either component alone or using randomly selected skeleton-strategy pairs. 

Method InternVL3-8B Qwen3VL-8B LLaVA-OV2-8B Avg. 

Skeleton Only 72.3 70.0 73.7 72.0 Strategy Only 77.6 72.4 75.5 75.2 Random Skeleton + Strategy 76.1 71.0 75.4 74.2 Skeleton + Strategy, one per sample 78.7 75.8 76.3 76.9 

SSP 79.1 75.5 76.3 77.0 

Table 2: Efficiency of reusable strategy pairs on 1,000 NegVQA samples. Total strategy-generation time and generated-token count are reported when SSP reuses cached strategy pairs and when it generates a new strategy for every sample. Lower values indicate greater efficiency.                  

> Reusable strategy Per-sample strategy Model Time (s) Tokens Time (s) Tokens
> GPT-4o 51.45 489 2,237.84 20,317 Qwen3VL-8B 35.97 463 1,564.76 20,114 Qwen3VL-2B 27.19 423 1,182.17 18,914

visual conditions without additional guidance. Compared with CoT Negation, SSP also achieves more stable performance. The hand-written CoT rule improves InternVL3-8B and InternVL3-2B, but it hurts Qwen3VL-8B and Qwen3VL-2B substantially. For example, Qwen3VL-2B drops from 51.0 with Plain Prompt to 29.8 with CoT Negation. A fixed rule for converting negation questions into positive questions may not generalize well across different model families. Compared with directly attaching four negation examples to the prompt, SSP still performs better on all models. Simply adding a few negation examples is less effective than abstracting the question type and providing a reusable strategy. Rather than relying on instance-level demonstrations, SSP captures the common reasoning pattern behind a class of negation questions. Meanwhile, SSP addresses this issue by explicitly providing an abstract question skeleton and a reusable reasoning strategy, allowing the model to focus on the negation-aware structure of the question. SSP 

consistently VLM model accuracy, showing that skeleton-guided and strategy-guided prompting provides more reliable negation reasoning guidance than other baselines. Figure 4 reports the results on DNVQA, which evaluates implicit negation expressed without the explicit markers not , no , or without . SSP achieves the highest accuracy for all six evaluated models. Relative to Plain Prompt, it improves InternVL3-8B from 63.84 to 67.20, Qwen3VL-8B from 50.45 to 67.62, and LLaVA-OneVision2-8B from 60.57 to 66.59. The same pattern holds for the smaller models: accuracy increases from 57.60 to 60.05 for InternVL3-2B and from 46.72 to 56.89 for Qwen3VL-2B. SSP also improves GPT-4o from 56.58 to 64.24. These gains range from 2.45 to 17.17 percentage points, with the largest improvements observed for the Qwen3VL models. The two prompting baselines behave less consistently on DNVQA. CoT Negation improves five models over Plain Prompt, but reduces InternVL3-8B accuracy from 63.84 to 58.30. Attaching four examples benefits Qwen3VL-8B, Qwen3VL-2B, and GPT-4o, but reduces accuracy for both InternVL3 models and LLaVA-OneVision2-8B. In contrast, SSP outperforms the strongest baseline for every model, with margins ranging from 1.93 points on InternVL3-2B to 4.29 points on Qwen3VL-2B. Together with the NegVQA results, these findings show that the effectiveness of SSP is not restricted to questions containing explicit negation words. Skeleton-conditioned strategies also improve performance when exclusion or absence is conveyed through more varied implicit expressions. 8Pool size Accuracy (%)            

> 32 76.2 64 76.8 128 78.6 256 79.1 512 79.1
> Number of samples Accuracy (%)
> 177.4 278.3 379.1 479.1 579.1

Table 3: Sensitivity of SSP to example-pool size and strategy-generation sample count on NegVQA using InternVL3-8B. Left: Accuracy increases as the example pool grows from 32 to 256 examples and saturates thereafter. Right: Accuracy reaches its maximum when three examples are used to generate each strategy, with no further improvement from additional examples. 

4.2 SSP Components are Complementary 

We further conduct ablation studies on the 8B-level models to analyze the contribution of each component in 

SSP . We compare the full Skeleton + Strategy method with three variants: Skeleton Only , which removes the reasoning strategy and only provides the extracted skeleton; Strategy Only , which removes the skeleton and only provides the generated reasoning strategy; and Random Skeleton + Strategy , which randomly selects a skeleton-strategy pair instead of using the one matched to the current question type. The ablation results show that both skeleton and strategy contribute to the final performance. Using only the skeleton achieves 72.3 on InternVL3-8B, 70.0 on Qwen3VL-8B, and 73.7 on LLaVA-OneVision2-8B, which is weaker than the full SSP method. The skeleton alone can provide useful structural information, but it does not fully specify how the model should reason over the negated visual condition. Using only the strategy performs better than Skeleton Only, reaching 77.6 on InternVL3-8B, 72.4 on Qwen3VL-8B, and 75.5 on LLaVA-OneVision2-8B. The reasoning strategy is an important component of SSP . However, Strategy Only still underperforms the full method on InternVL3-8B and Qwen3VL-8B, showing that the skeleton provides complementary information by explicitly identifying the question type. The Random Skeleton + Strategy variant also performs worse than the full method. For example, it obtains 76.1 on InternVL3-8B and 71.0 on Qwen3VL-8B, compared with 79.1 and 75.5 from the matched Skeleton + Strategy setting. This demonstrates that the gain of SSP does not simply come from adding any abstract instruction to the prompt. Instead, the skeleton and strategy need to match the current negation question type in order to provide effective guidance. We also compare the cached SSP design with a variant that generates a new skeleton–strategy pair for every test sample. The per-sample variant achieves accuracies of 78.7, 75.8, and 76.3 on InternVL3-8B, Qwen3VL-8B, and LLaVA-OneVision2-8B, respectively. These results are comparable to those of cached SSP , which achieves 79.1, 75.5, and 76.3, respectively. Thus, reusing strategies changes accuracy by at most 0.4% while substantially reducing strategy-generation overhead. Table 2 quantifies this efficiency gain over 1,000 NegVQA samples. With reusable strategies, the three evaluated models require only 27.19–51.45 seconds and generate 423–489 output tokens. Generating a strategy separately for every sample instead requires 1,182.17–2,237.84 seconds and 18,914–20,317 output tokens. Strategy reuse therefore reduces generation time by approximately 43 times and generated-token count by approximately 42–45 times. These results show that the caching mechanism preserves the accuracy of per-sample strategy generation while making 

SSP substantially more efficient at inference time. 

4.3 Effective of Example Pool Size 

To further evaluate the the contribution of the example pool, we conduct experiments on variant example pool size, which contains 32, 64, 128, 256, and 512 negation VQA pairs respectively. The results are reported in Table 3. We observe an improvement in performance as the size of the example pool increases with small pool sizes. Specifically, increasing the pool size from 32 to 64 examples improves the accuracy from 76.2% to 76.8%, while further expanding the pool to 128 examples results in 78.6%. The best performance of 79.1% is achieved when the pool size is increased to 256 examples. However, increasing the example pool beyond 9Table 4: Visualization of generated strategies for different negation-aware question skeletons. Each strategy is generated once for a skeleton and reused for later questions with the same question type.       

> Skeleton Generated Strategy
> What [X] is not [Y] The correct answer to a negative question is the option that specifies the incorrect attribute or action. How many [X] is not [Y] Choose the option that represents the incorrect or less accurate number to the question. Why [X] is not [Y] The correct answer is that identifies the reason why the situ-ation described in the question does not occur, which can be determined by selecting the option that describes an incorrect or unrelated circumstance. Which [X] is not [Y] Identifies the elements or elements that does not match the con-dition described in the question, and it can be determined by selecting the option that, if negated, would make the statement in the question true. Is it not [X] The correct answer is the option that contradicts the statement in the question, indicating the absence or incorrectness of the described condition.

256 examples does not provide additional benefits, as the performance remains unchanged when the pool size reaches 512 examples. This saturation phenomenon suggests that the proposed SSP framework can effectively capture the representative reasoning patterns of negation questions using a relatively compact example pool. Once sufficient diversity of negation structures and reasoning strategies has been covered, adding more examples introduces limited new information. 

4.4 Effect of Sample Number 

For each of the new question types, we retrieve 3 negation VQA pairs from the example pool. To evaluate the number of sampled pairs to the SSP ’s performance, we conduct experiments with different number of sampled pair to generate different strategy for each question types. The results are reported in Table 3. Increasing the number of sampled examples generally improves the performance of the proposed SSP framework. When only one example is used to generate the negation instruction, the model achieves an accuracy of 77.4%. Increasing the number of examples to two further improves the accuracy to 78.3%, indicating that additional examples provide more comprehensive guidance for constructing robust reasoning strategies. The performance reaches its maximum value of 79.1% when three examples are used. Interestingly, further increasing the number of sampled examples to four or five does not yield additional improvements, suggesting that three representative examples are sufficient for capturing the essential reasoning patterns required for most negation question types. 

4.5 Generated Strategy Visualization 

To better understand how SSP guides the VLM, we visualize several generated strategies associated with different question skeletons. Since each strategy is generated at the skeleton level rather than the instance level, it captures the common reasoning pattern required by a group of negation questions, allowing us to examine whether the generated strategy correctly reflects the semantic role of the negation operator and whether it provides useful guidance for answering the corresponding question type. Table 4 shows examples of extracted skeletons and their corresponding generated strategies. Each skeleton abstracts away instance-specific objects, attributes, or actions using placeholders such as X and Y, while preserving the interrogative word and negation structure. The generated strategy then describes how the model should reason over questions with that skeleton. Ideally, a high-quality strategy should explicitly remind the model to focus on the negated condition, avoid answering the positive version of the question, and select the option or visual entity that satisfies the negative constraint. 10 5 Conclusion 

We propose Skeleton-and-Strategy Prompting ( SSP ), a training-free inference-time framework for improving negation understanding in visual question answering. Rather than directly prompting VLMs with negation questions or relying only on instance-level demonstrations, SSP abstracts each question into a reusable negation-aware skeleton and associates it with a concise reasoning strategy. By caching skeleton-strategy pairs according to question type, SSP avoids repeated strategy generation and provides lightweight guidance that can be reused across test samples. Experiments on the NegVQA benchmark and DNVQA benchmark show that SSP consistently improves performance across VLMs of different scales, including large, 8B-level, and 2B-level models. Ablation studies further demonstrate that both the skeleton and strategy components contribute to the final performance, while analyses on example pool size and sample number show that 

SSP can achieve strong results with a compact set of negative VQA examples. These findings suggest that explicit structure-aware prompting is an effective and efficient direction for improving VLM robustness on negation-based visual reasoning tasks. 

# References 

Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:23716–23736, 2022. Kumail Alhamoud, Shaden Alshammari, Yonglong Tian, Guohao Li, Philip H.S. Torr, Yoon Kim, and Marzyeh Ghassemi. Vision-language models do not understand negation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 29612–29622, June 2025. Xiang An, Yin Xie, Feilong Tang, Yunyao Yan, Huajie Tan, Didi Zhu, Changrui Chen, Xiuwei Zhao, Bin Qin, Kaicheng Yang, Yifei Shen, Yuanhan Zhang, Kaichen Zhang, Wenkang Zhang, Zheng Cheng, Nansen Zhang, Chunsheng Wu, Chunjiang Ge, Zimin Ran, Dehua Song, Chunyuan Li, Shikun Feng, Ming Hu, Zhangquan Chen, Junbo Niu, Bo Li, Ziyong Feng, Ziwei Liu, Zongyuan Ge, and Jiankang Deng. Llava-onevision-2: Towards next-generation perceptual intelligence, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605. 25979 .Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, Wenbin Ge, Zhifang Guo, Qidong Huang, Jie Huang, Fei Huang, Binyuan Hui, Shutong Jiang, Zhaohai Li, Mingsheng Li, Mei Li, Kaixin Li, Zicheng Lin, Junyang Lin, Xuejing Liu, Jiawei Liu, Chenglong Liu, Yang Liu, Dayiheng Liu, Shixuan Liu, Dunjie Lu, Ruilin Luo, Chenxu Lv, Rui Men, Lingchen Meng, Xuancheng Ren, Xingzhang Ren, Sibo Song, Yuchong Sun, Jun Tang, Jianhong Tu, Jianqiang Wan, Peng Wang, Pengfei Wang, Qiuyue Wang, Yuxuan Wang, Tianbao Xie, Yiheng Xu, Haiyang Xu, Jin Xu, Zhibo Yang, Mingkun Yang, Jianxin Yang, An Yang, Bowen Yu, Fei Zhang, Hang Zhang, Xi Zhang, Bo Zheng, Humen Zhong, Jingren Zhou, Fan Zhou, Jing Zhou, Yuanzhi Zhu, and Ke Zhu. Qwen3-vl technical report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.21631 .Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901, 2020. Yuliang Cai, Jesse Thomason, and Mohammad Rostami. Tng-clip:training-time negation data generation for negation awareness of clip, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.18434 .Allyson Ettinger. What BERT is not: Lessons from a new suite of psycholinguistic diagnostics for language models. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 8:34–48, 2020. doi: 10.1162/tacl_ a_00298. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.tacl-1.3/ .Iker García-Ferrero, Begoña Altuna, Javier Alvez, Itziar Gonzalez-Dios, and German Rigau. This is not a dataset: A large negation benchmark to challenge large language models. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 

11 Processing , pp. 8596–8615, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.531. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.531/ .Yash Goyal, Tejas Khot, Douglas Summers-Stay, Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh. Making the v in vqa matter: Elevating the role of image understanding in visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , July 2017. Jiaxian Guo, Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Anthony Meng Huat Tiong, Boyang Li, Dacheng Tao, and Steven Hoi. From images to textual prompts: Zero-shot visual question answering with frozen large language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 10867–10877, June 2023. Nora Kassner and Hinrich Schütze. Negated and misprimed probes for pretrained language models: Birds can talk, but cannot fly. In Dan Jurafsky, Joyce Chai, Natalie Schluter, and Joel Tetreault (eds.), Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pp. 7811–7818, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.698. URL https: //aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.698/ .Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large language models are zero-shot reasoners. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=e2TBb5y0yFf .OpenAI, :, Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P. Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, Aleksander Mądry, Alex Baker-Whitcomb, Alex Beutel, Alex Borzunov, Alex Carney, Alex Chow, Alex Kirillov, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Alex Renzin, Alex Tachard Passos, Alexander Kirillov, Alexi Christakis, Alexis Conneau, Ali Kamali, Allan Jabri, Al-lison Moyer, Allison Tam, Amadou Crookes, Amin Tootoochian, Amin Tootoonchian, Ananya Kumar, Andrea Vallone, Andrej Karpathy, Andrew Braunstein, Andrew Cann, Andrew Codispoti, Andrew Galu, Andrew Kondrich, Andrew Tulloch, Andrey Mishchenko, Angela Baek, Angela Jiang, Antoine Pelisse, Antonia Woodford, Anuj Gosalia, Arka Dhar, Ashley Pantuliano, Avi Nayak, Avital Oliver, Barret Zoph, Behrooz Ghorbani, Ben Leimberger, Ben Rossen, Ben Sokolowsky, Ben Wang, Benjamin Zweig, Beth Hoover, Blake Samic, Bob McGrew, Bobby Spero, Bogo Giertler, Bowen Cheng, Brad Lightcap, Brandon Walkin, Brendan Quinn, Brian Guarraci, Brian Hsu, Bright Kellogg, Brydon Eastman, Camillo Lugaresi, Carroll Wainwright, Cary Bassin, Cary Hudson, Casey Chu, Chad Nelson, Chak Li, Chan Jun Shern, Channing Conger, Charlotte Barette, Chelsea Voss, Chen Ding, Cheng Lu, Chong Zhang, Chris Beau-mont, Chris Hallacy, Chris Koch, Christian Gibson, Christina Kim, Christine Choi, Christine McLeavey, Christopher Hesse, Claudia Fischer, Clemens Winter, Coley Czarnecki, Colin Jarvis, Colin Wei, Con-stantin Koumouzelis, Dane Sherburn, Daniel Kappler, Daniel Levin, Daniel Levy, David Carr, David Farhi, David Mely, David Robinson, David Sasaki, Denny Jin, Dev Valladares, Dimitris Tsipras, Doug Li, Duc Phong Nguyen, Duncan Findlay, Edede Oiwoh, Edmund Wong, Ehsan Asdar, Elizabeth Proehl, Elizabeth Yang, Eric Antonow, Eric Kramer, Eric Peterson, Eric Sigler, Eric Wallace, Eugene Brevdo, Evan Mays, Farzad Khorasani, Felipe Petroski Such, Filippo Raso, Francis Zhang, Fred von Lohmann, Freddie Sulit, Gabriel Goh, Gene Oden, Geoff Salmon, Giulio Starace, Greg Brockman, Hadi Salman, Haiming Bao, Haitang Hu, Hannah Wong, Haoyu Wang, Heather Schmidt, Heather Whitney, Heewoo Jun, Hendrik Kirchner, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Hongyu Ren, Huiwen Chang, Hyung Won Chung, Ian Kivlichan, Ian O’Connell, Ian O’Connell, Ian Osband, Ian Silber, Ian Sohl, Ibrahim Okuyucu, Ikai Lan, Ilya Kostrikov, Ilya Sutskever, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jacob Coxon, Jacob Menick, Jakub Pachocki, James Aung, James Betker, James Crooks, James Lennon, Jamie Kiros, Jan Leike, Jane Park, Jason Kwon, Jason Phang, Jason Teplitz, Jason Wei, Jason Wolfe, Jay Chen, Jeff Har-ris, Jenia Varavva, Jessica Gan Lee, Jessica Shieh, Ji Lin, Jiahui Yu, Jiayi Weng, Jie Tang, Jieqi Yu, Joanne Jang, Joaquin Quinonero Candela, Joe Beutler, Joe Landers, Joel Parish, Johannes Heidecke, John Schul-man, Jonathan Lachman, Jonathan McKay, Jonathan Uesato, Jonathan Ward, Jong Wook Kim, Joost Huizinga, Jordan Sitkin, Jos Kraaijeveld, Josh Gross, Josh Kaplan, Josh Snyder, Joshua Achiam, Joy Jiao, Joyce Lee, Juntang Zhuang, Justyn Harriman, Kai Fricke, Kai Hayashi, Karan Singhal, Katy Shi, Kavin Karthik, Kayla Wood, Kendra Rimbach, Kenny Hsu, Kenny Nguyen, Keren Gu-Lemberg, Kevin Button, 12 Kevin Liu, Kiel Howe, Krithika Muthukumar, Kyle Luther, Lama Ahmad, Larry Kai, Lauren Itow, Lauren Workman, Leher Pathak, Leo Chen, Li Jing, Lia Guy, Liam Fedus, Liang Zhou, Lien Mamitsuka, Lilian Weng, Lindsay McCallum, Lindsey Held, Long Ouyang, Louis Feuvrier, Lu Zhang, Lukas Kondraciuk, Lukasz Kaiser, Luke Hewitt, Luke Metz, Lyric Doshi, Mada Aflak, Maddie Simens, Madelaine Boyd, Madeleine Thompson, Marat Dukhan, Mark Chen, Mark Gray, Mark Hudnall, Marvin Zhang, Marwan Aljubeh, Mateusz Litwin, Matthew Zeng, Max Johnson, Maya Shetty, Mayank Gupta, Meghan Shah, Mehmet Yatbaz, Meng Jia Yang, Mengchao Zhong, Mia Glaese, Mianna Chen, Michael Janner, Michael Lampe, Michael Petrov, Michael Wu, Michele Wang, Michelle Fradin, Michelle Pokrass, Miguel Castro, Miguel Oom Temudo de Castro, Mikhail Pavlov, Miles Brundage, Miles Wang, Minal Khan, Mira Murati, Mo Bavarian, Molly Lin, Murat Yesildal, Nacho Soto, Natalia Gimelshein, Natalie Cone, Natalie Stau-dacher, Natalie Summers, Natan LaFontaine, Neil Chowdhury, Nick Ryder, Nick Stathas, Nick Turley, Nik Tezak, Niko Felix, Nithanth Kudige, Nitish Keskar, Noah Deutsch, Noel Bundick, Nora Puckett, Ofir Nachum, Ola Okelola, Oleg Boiko, Oleg Murk, Oliver Jaffe, Olivia Watkins, Olivier Godement, Owen Campbell-Moore, Patrick Chao, Paul McMillan, Pavel Belov, Peng Su, Peter Bak, Peter Bakkum, Peter Deng, Peter Dolan, Peter Hoeschele, Peter Welinder, Phil Tillet, Philip Pronin, Philippe Tillet, Prafulla Dhariwal, Qiming Yuan, Rachel Dias, Rachel Lim, Rahul Arora, Rajan Troll, Randall Lin, Rapha Gon-tijo Lopes, Raul Puri, Reah Miyara, Reimar Leike, Renaud Gaubert, Reza Zamani, Ricky Wang, Rob Donnelly, Rob Honsby, Rocky Smith, Rohan Sahai, Rohit Ramchandani, Romain Huet, Rory Carmichael, Rowan Zellers, Roy Chen, Ruby Chen, Ruslan Nigmatullin, Ryan Cheu, Saachi Jain, Sam Altman, Sam Schoenholz, Sam Toizer, Samuel Miserendino, Sandhini Agarwal, Sara Culver, Scott Ethersmith, Scott Gray, Sean Grove, Sean Metzger, Shamez Hermani, Shantanu Jain, Shengjia Zhao, Sherwin Wu, Shino Jomoto, Shirong Wu, Shuaiqi, Xia, Sonia Phene, Spencer Papay, Srinivas Narayanan, Steve Coffey, Steve Lee, Stewart Hall, Suchir Balaji, Tal Broda, Tal Stramer, Tao Xu, Tarun Gogineni, Taya Christianson, Ted Sanders, Tejal Patwardhan, Thomas Cunninghman, Thomas Degry, Thomas Dimson, Thomas Raoux, Thomas Shadwell, Tianhao Zheng, Todd Underwood, Todor Markov, Toki Sherbakov, Tom Rubin, Tom Stasi, Tomer Kaftan, Tristan Heywood, Troy Peterson, Tyce Walters, Tyna Eloundou, Valerie Qi, Veit Moeller, Vinnie Monaco, Vishal Kuo, Vlad Fomenko, Wayne Chang, Weiyi Zheng, Wenda Zhou, Wesam Manassra, Will Sheu, Wojciech Zaremba, Yash Patil, Yilei Qian, Yongjik Kim, Youlong Cheng, Yu Zhang, Yuchen He, Yuchen Zhang, Yujia Jin, Yunxing Dai, and Yury Malkov. Gpt-4o system card, 2024. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.21276 .Junsung Park, Jungbeom Lee, Jongyoon Song, Sangwon Yu, Dahuin Jung, and Sungroh Yoon. Know ”no” better: A data-driven approach for enhancing negation awareness in clip. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pp. 2825–2835, October 2025. Vincent Quantmeyer, Pablo Mosteiro, and Albert Gatt. How and where does CLIP process negation? In Jing Gu, Tsu-Jui (Ray) Fu, Drew Hudson, Asli Celikyilmaz, and William Wang (eds.), Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Advances in Language and Vision Research (ALVR) , pp. 59–72, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.alvr-1.5. URL https: //aclanthology.org/2024.alvr-1.5/ .Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), 

Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr. press/v139/radford21a.html .Hao Shao, Shengju Qian, Han Xiao, Guanglu Song, Zhuofan Zong, Letian Wang, Yu Liu, and Hongsheng Li. Visual cot: Advancing multi-modal language models with a comprehensive dataset and benchmark for chain-of-thought reasoning. In The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=aXeiCbMFFJ .Jaisidh Singh, Ishaan Shrivastava, Mayank Vatsa, Richa Singh, and Aparna Bharati. Learn "no" to say "yes" better: Improving vision-language models via negations, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403. 20312 .13 Anthony Meng Huat Tiong, Junnan Li, Boyang Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven C.H. Hoi. Plug-and-play VQA: Zero-shot VQA by conjoining large pretrained models with zero training. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022 , pp. 951–967, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-emnlp.67. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022. findings-emnlp.67/ .Thinh Hung Truong, Timothy Baldwin, Karin Verspoor, and Trevor Cohn. Language models are not naysay-ers: an analysis of language models on negation benchmarks. In Alexis Palmer and Jose Camacho-collados (eds.), Proceedings of the 12th Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM 2023) , pp. 101–114, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.starsem-1.10. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.starsem-1.10/ .Maria Tsimpoukelli, Jacob Menick, Serkan Cabi, S. M. Ali Eslami, Oriol Vinyals, and Felix Hill. Multimodal few-shot learning with frozen language models. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’21, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2021. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713845393. Zhengyuan Yang, Zhe Gan, Jianfeng Wang, Xiaowei Hu, Yumao Lu, Zicheng Liu, and Lijuan Wang. An empirical study of GPT-3 for few-shot knowledge-based VQA. CoRR , abs/2109.05014, 2021. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2109.05014 .Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Pratyusha Kalluri, Dan Jurafsky, and James Zou. When and why vision-language models behave like bags-of-words, and what to do about it? In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=KRLUvxh8uaX .Yuhui Zhang, Yuchang Su, Yiming Liu, and Serena Yeung-Levy. NegVQA: Can vision language models understand negation? In Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pp. 3707–3716, Vienna, Austria, July 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-256-5. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.findings-acl.191. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-acl.191/ .Zhuosheng Zhang, Aston Zhang, Mu Li, Hai Zhao, George Karypis, and Alex Smola. Multimodal Chain-of-Thought Reasoning in Language Models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2024. URL 

https://mlanthology.org/tmlr/2024/zhang2024tmlr-multimodal/ .Haozhe Zhao, Zefan Cai, Shuzheng Si, Xiaojian Ma, Kaikai An, Liang Chen, Zixuan Liu, Sheng Wang, Wenjuan Han, and Baobao Chang. MMICL: Empowering vision-language model with multi-modal in-context learning. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. URL 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=5KojubHBr8 .Jinguo Zhu, Weiyun Wang, Zhe Chen, Zhaoyang Liu, Shenglong Ye, Lixin Gu, Hao Tian, Yuchen Duan, Weijie Su, Jie Shao, Zhangwei Gao, Erfei Cui, Xuehui Wang, Yue Cao, Yangzhou Liu, Xingguang Wei, Hongjie Zhang, Haomin Wang, Weiye Xu, Hao Li, Jiahao Wang, Nianchen Deng, Songze Li, Yinan He, Tan Jiang, Jiapeng Luo, Yi Wang, Conghui He, Botian Shi, Xingcheng Zhang, Wenqi Shao, Junjun He, Yingtong Xiong, Wenwen Qu, Peng Sun, Penglong Jiao, Han Lv, Lijun Wu, Kaipeng Zhang, Huipeng Deng, Jiaye Ge, Kai Chen, Limin Wang, Min Dou, Lewei Lu, Xizhou Zhu, Tong Lu, Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, Jifeng Dai, and Wenhai Wang. Internvl3: Exploring advanced training and test-time recipes for open-source multimodal models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.10479 .Yongshuo Zong, Ondrej Bohdal, and Timothy Hospedales. VL-ICL Bench: The Devil in the Details of Multimodal In-Context Learning. arXiv e-prints , art. arXiv:2403.13164, March 2024. doi: 10.48550/ arXiv.2403.13164. 14 A Appendix 

A.1 Strategy Extraction Pipeline 

In Sec 3.3, we mentioned that if t / ∈ D , we select K negative VQA pairs from the negative example pool, which share the same skeleton. We then prompt the VLM with those samples to generate a concise one-sentence reasoning strategy description. Given a negative question q with the image I, correct answer at,and wrong answer af , we first construct a uni-sample prompt with the specific format below: 

Example i:Image: ⟨image ⟩

Negative question: q

Answer: at, not af .

We then combine the 4 uni-sample prompts with instruction as the prompt to generate the strategy via VLM: “‘latex 

You are given several visual question answering examples that all share the same question structure. For each, the image, the question, and the correct answer are provided. 

Example 1: Image: ⟨image 1⟩

Negative question: q1

Answer: at, 1, not af, 1.

Example 2: Image: ⟨image 2⟩

Negative question: q2

Answer: at, 2, not af, 2.

Example 3: Image: ⟨image 3⟩

Negative question: q3

Answer: at, 3, not af, 3.

Example 4: Image: ⟨image 4⟩

Negative question: q4

Answer: at, 4, not af, 4.Provide a rule for determining the correct answer to negative questions in visual question answering. The rule should specify whether the correct answer is the positive or the incorrect option, and how to identify it, and must NOT mention the specific objects or scenes in the examples. Output it in one sentence beginning with “RULE:” 

A.2 DNVQA Benchmark Construction 

In addition to explicit negation questions that contain lexical negation markers such as not , no , or without ,we construct an diverse negation VQA benchmark (DNVQA), which contains the implicit negation question to evaluate whether VLMs can handle negation when it is expressed implicitly. Implicit negation refers to the questions whose semantic intent is negative, but whose surface form does not directly include explicit negation words. For example, instead of asking " Which object is not on the table? ", a soft negation question may ask "Which object is missing from the table? " or " Which object is absent from the table? " Such questions still require the model to reason about exclusion or absence, but the negation is conveyed through semantically negative expressions rather than explicit negation operators. To build the implicit negation data, we start from positive-form VQA examples consisting of an image, a question, the original correct answer, and a candidate answer set. The pipeline is shown in Algorithm 2. For each example, we first identify the positive visual condition described by the question and answer. We 15 Algorithm 2 Soft Negation Data Construction 

Require: Positive VQA dataset D

Require: Explicit negation word set N

Ensure: diverse negation dataset Dimplicit  

> 1:

Dimplicit ← ∅  

> 2:

for each ( Ii, q i, a i, Ai) ∈ D do  

> 3:

Select a− 

> i

∈ A i such that a−

> i

̸ = ai 

> 4:

Rewrite qi into a soft negation question qimplicit  

> i

using an LLM  

> 5:

if qimplicit  

> i

contains any word in N then  

> 6:

Discard this example  

> 7:

continue  

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

if qsoft  

> i

is visually grounded and a− 

> i

is correct then  

> 10:

Add ( Ii, q implicit  

> i

, a − 

> i

, a i) to Dimplicit  

> 11:

else  

> 12:

Discard this example  

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

return Dimplicit 

then rewrite the question into an implicit negation form by replacing the positive intent with an implicit negative expression such as missing , absent , different from , other than , excluded , or inconsistent with . During rewriting, we avoid using explicit negation words, including not , no , never , and without . The target answer is then changed from the original positive answer to an alternative candidate that does not satisfy the original positive condition but satisfies the new soft negative question. This process produces examples that preserve the original image and answer space while changing the reasoning requirement from positive recognition to implicit negation understanding. We use an LLM-based rewriting step to generate fluent soft negation questions. To ensure data quality, each generated question is constrained to satisfy three requirements: (1) it must preserve the visual grounding of the original image, (2) it must express a negative or exclusion-based intent without explicit negation markers, and (3) its correct answer must be the alternative answer rather than the original positive answer. Examples that fail these constraints are discarded. The resulting soft negation data allows us to evaluate whether VLMs can recognize negation-like reasoning patterns beyond simple lexical cues. 16