Title: 2603.21225v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.21225v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 01:19:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
1

Two -stage robust bilevel optimization model for facility location considering operational 

service level under disruption  risk    

> Haitao HU
> School of Management Science & Engineering, Dongbei University of Finance and Economics
> haitaohudufe@163.com
> Jing LI
> School of Management Science & Engineering, Dongbei University of Finance and Economics
> lijing2020dufe@163.com
> Jiafu TANG
> School of Management Science & Engineering, Dongbei University of Finance and Economics
> tangjiafu@dufe.edu.cn
> Bo ZENG
> Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Pittsburgh
> bzeng@pitt.edu

Abstract 

The bilevel facility location problem (BO -FLP) is one of the core optimization  problems  behind 

the design of many decentralized industrial systems, e.g., supply chain systems where a supplier 

constructs some critical facilities and then  uses  them to serve  retailers  in a cost -effective fashion, 

while retailers  directly  handle customers aiming to  minimize  the  total unmet demand  in a rather 

independent  fashion.  When uncertainty is considered, scenario -based stochastic approaches are 

commonly used, but they often become impractical due to insufficient data or an exponential 

number of scenarios. T o address this issue, this paper adopts robust optimization and proposes 

a novel two -stage robust bilevel facility location model. Several structural properties are 

derived to improve both theoretical understanding and solution efficiency. Based on this, a n

enhanced column -and -constraint generation algorithm is developed for robust bilevel 

optimization with decision -dependent uncertainty, significantly improving exact solution 

capability over the standard method.  Numerical results show that , compared to the  centralized 

two -stage RO model, our  model  pays more attention to demand  fulfillment , typically resulting 

in higher service efficiency and better utilization of supply capacity.  Under  a small -scale 

disruption,  this new  model  delivers better service performance.  However , under  a large -scale 

disruption,  the  centralized  model  performs more effectively .

Keywords:  Facilit y location , robust optimization, bilevel optimization, column and  constraint 

generation 2

1. Introduction 

The facility location problem  (FLP)  is a fundamental topic in operations research , which is 

often used to address the design and operational problems in supply chain, logistics and 

telecommunications systems. In  simple  and most common  situations , it is often formulated as 

a mixed integer program (MIP), which seeks to minimize the overall cost that includes both the 

fixed cost associated with facility construction decisions and the operational cost associated 

with service decisions between facilit ies and cli ents ( Snyder  et al., 2016 ).  We note that this 

single -level formulation depends on a key assumption  — namely, that all decisions are made 

by a single decision maker (DM) acting in pursuit of a unified interest. In other words, the 

model presumes a vertical decision -making system wher e no conflict exists among decision -

making parties , as shown in Fig. 1a. 

Nevertheless, very often this is not the case in supply chain systems.  Many real -world 

systems , decisions are made by multiple stakeholders who may have distinct, and sometimes 

conflicting,  interests . For instance,  a DM  (e.g., a manufacturer) , may determine the locations 

of facilities to optimize  her  overall  cost or  efficiency , acting as the  upper -level  DM that is also 

known as the leader. W hile individual retailers or regional managers  in the system  make local 

decisions , e.g.,  order quantities or service l evel s,  based on their own interest s or specifications, 

acting as the lower -level DMs that is also known as the followers.  Under such circumstances, 

the whole  supply chain system  is  decentralized and hierarchical , as illustrated in Fig. 1b, which 

is generally modeled by the bilevel optimization (BO) scheme. 

For instance, in the context of distribution planning, Camacho -Vallejo et al. (2022)  proposed 

a BO  model in which a central firm seeks to maximize its profit while considering the 

transportation cost minimization behavior of downstream distributors. Similarly, in the domain 

of emergency facility location and disaster management, Liu et al. (2023) consi dered a  BO 

model  where a government agency, acting as the leader, aims to improve the performance of 

the trauma care network while limiting public subsidies f or upgrading emergency centers, 

whereas hospital groups, as  the  follower, seek to redesign the network to maximize marginal 

profit.  The  layout of charging stations or distributed energy sites also faces similar problems. 

Even for ordinary electric vehicle charging piles facility location, while the system operator 3

determining the layout, the issue of the consumers' preferences also  needs  to be considered by 

a BO model ( Lamontagne  et al., 2023).  It is often recognized that BO  provides a structured 

framework that enables more adaptive and resilient supply chain network design. 

When random factors, e.g., disruptions on facilities, are considered, strategic and operational 

decisions are generally considered in two different stages, i.e., strategic ones in stage 1 and 

operational ones in stage 2, leading to a two -stage decision mak ing problem. The classical MIP 

models have been extended to their two -stage stochastic programming (SP) or robust 

optimization (RO), according to the available data and attitude towards randomness (Snyder et 

al., 2016). For BO models, a few SP extensions h ave been developed and investigated (Zhang 

& Özaltın, 2021; Li et al, 2023). Actually, different from the centralized MIP models, the lower -

level problem often coincides with the second -stage decision making, rendering the leader 

being the first -stage and  the follower the second -stage decision makers respectively. As in Fig. 

1b, the network designer, i.e., the leader, makes pre -disruption strategic location decisions, and 

the network user, serving as the follower, optimizes allocation and ensures supply sec urity after 

the disruption risk occurs.  We mention that, due to limited historical disruption data in practice, 

it is often difficult to accurately obtain or estimate the probability of the facility disruptions. In 

such cases, RO is more appropriate as it does not depend on probabilistic distrib ution 

information. Now, a few two -stage RO for centralized MIP have appeared in the literature 

uncertainties (An et al., 2014, Cheng et al., 2021; Ahmadi et al., 2023). However, they overlook 

the distinct objective o f the operational level, leading to allocation decisions that may fail to 

meet the actual needs of the network user, and consequently, result in solutions that are 

misaligned with practical realities .       

> Fig.1a Centralized decision -making Fig.1b Decentralized decision -making
> Fig.1 The difference between the Centralized and Decentralized decision -making 4

To simultaneously address both the  disruption  risk and the  relevant shareholders decision  in 

real life, this paper proposes a more comprehensive model , named as  two -stage robust bilevel 

facility location problem (2 -stage RBO -FLP),  that integrates the distinct features of both the 

RO-FLP and  BO-FLP models.  The 2 -stage RBO -FLP  model  captures both the disruption risk 

and the behavioral divergence between the designer and the user  in the FLP , providing a more 

realistic and adaptive approach to resilient supply chain network.  Specifically, in 2 -stage RBO -

FLP,  the upper -level network designer makes pre -disruption facility location decisions to 

minimize the total system cost  in the first -stage.  At the lower level  (also the second stage)  the 

network user responds by making optimal supply allocation decisions based on the available 

operationa l facilities after  the  disruption  risk , aiming  at  minimize total unmet demand  to 

guarantee  service level . Unlike traditional two -stage  RO, it  features a  BO  formulation  in the 

second stage, reflecting the decentralized interaction between the network designer and the user. 

Compare d existing models, our 2 -stage RBO -FLP  model is significantly more challenging to 

solve due to its  complex  structure. 

To solve the 2 -stage  RBO -FPL model exactly, we  proposed  an improved version of  C&CG -

BO , a method  for  general  two -stage robust BO problems  (Xu , 2023 ),  by  adopt ing  decision -

dependent uncertainty (DDU) to re duce the search space of disruption scenario for the  2-stage 

RBO -FLP model, named as C&CG -BO -DDU. Similar to the basic C&CG  and  C&CG -BO ,

C&CG -BO -DDU  involves solving a master problem (MP) and a subproblem (SP) in an 

iterative fashion. It is worth highlighting that SP  of C&CG -BO  is actually a pessimistic bilevel 

optimization model that is very challenging to solve. Nevertheless,  by leveraging  reformulation 

techniques and the critical DDU structure  of  the  2-stage RBO -FLP, C&CG -BO -DDU is able to 

improve our solution capacity to SP drastically, and therefore leading to a significant reduction 

in the overall computational time. 

The main  contributions  of this paper  are  summarized as follows: 1 ) We extend the  bilevel 

facility location problem into uncertain scenarios under two -stage RO framework and  develop 

a two -stage robust bilevel facility location model considering operational service level under 

the facility disruption risk.  To the best of our knowledge,  it is the first  work  to propose a two -

stage robust BO model for facility location problem under disruption risk,  which is significant 5

for manage rs to  pay more attention on operational performance  when designing a resilient 

supply chain  in practice. 2) We then  derive  several theoretical properties to highlight the 

fundamental differences between  two -stage RO -FLP  and  two -stage RBO -FLP, and induce the 

condition under which the y are same . C&CG -BO algorithm  is customized  and improved, 

referred to as C&CG -BO -DDU, that  solve s the  2-stage RBO -FLP model  more efficiently 

compared to its  standard  implementation . 3)  We conduct extensive numerical tes ts to highlight 

that explicitly integrating the operational  performance  into strategic supply chain network 

design not only reduces available  supply  capacity waste and improves overall demand 

satisfaction, but also uncovers a dynamic coordination mechanism . It shows that,  under lower 

disruption risk, a decentralized decision -making structure can improve service level by 

allowing operational flexibility. In contrast, under higher disruption risk, a centralized 

management approach is more effective in enhanci ng the overall resilience and performance of 

the supply chain network. 

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related literature. Section 3 

presents the model formulation  and deduce s some propert ies. Section 4  develop s an improved 

C&CG -BO and presents our enhancement . Section 5  presents  the numerical  experiments and 

result s analysis . Section 6 concludes the paper. 

2. Literature review 

Focusing on the facility location studied in this paper, there are two streams in the literature. 

One is single level optimization and BO  from perspectives of decision process, i.e., 

centralization or decentralization, and the other is SP or RO models, from the perspectives of 

modeling of uncertainty. In the follows, we will review the state -of -the -art of the above models. 

2.1 Single level approaches for facility location 

For single level FLP, its  SP and RO  extensions  are two classic methods to deal with uncertain 

parameters.  SP  is suitable to the cases  when the distribution of the underlying uncertainty is 

fully known . Some classical SP studies can be found in Cui et al. (2010), Noyan et al. (2016), 

and Paul and Zhang (2019) for more details. While SP has been shown to be an effective 

approach , the optimizers’ curse will occur if data sample was calibrated from a biased 6

distribution.  In contrast, RO does not rely on exact probability distributions. Instead, it uses 

uncertain sets to represent random parameters and focuses on the worst -case scenario . It is 

particularly favored  in contexts  where uncertainties are difficult to estimate or data is scarce 

and  has received more attention recently.  Baron et al. (2011) buil t a multi -period capacitated 

fixed charge (single -stage) robust location model.  Gülpınar  et al . (201 3) propose d a tractable 

(single -stage) RO method to approxim ately solve stochastic facility location problem .

Whereas the s ingle -stage  RO method determines only here -and -now decisions which require 

the optimal  solution is feasible for all possible choices simultaneously, the two -stage RO 

method allows wait -and -see decisions that can adapt to the realized observations, while it is 

often possible in practice to adjust the solution after the uncertainty has been re vealed (Ben -Tal 

et al.,  2004) . Several two -stage  RO  optimization models have been proposed to  design supply 

chain networks in the presence of disruptions. For instance,  Cheng et al. (2021) considered a 

fixed -charge location problem that permits customer reassignment as a recourse  decision, 

where both demand and the number of disrupted facilities are uncertain and represented by 

budgeted uncertainty sets . Rahmati  et al. (2022) proposed a  two -stage robust optimizatio n or 

the uncapacitated hub location problem under demand uncertainty, where an uncertainty budget 

was used to control the level of conser vatism. The study also showed that an accelerated 

Benders decomposition with Pareto -optimal cuts improved solution efficiency, while a larger 

uncertainty budget led to higher total cost and more hub establishments. As demonstrated  by 

Ben -Tal et al. (2004), even a basic two -stage  RO  problem  can be NP -hard . Some researchers 

proposed d ifferent solution algorithms including approximation algorithm s (Feng et al., 2023) ,

Benders cutting plane algorithm  (Yin  et al., 2024) , and the C&CG  method. Note that  C&CG 

algori thm generally  requires significantly fewer iterations than Benders decomposition 

algorithm to find the optimal solution  and  has  efficiency in solving two -stage RO models. 

As mentioned above, there have been numerous studies related to single level optimization 

including SP and RO methods, which  ill ustrate d the  application scenarios of different methods .

Focusing on the disruptions risk, t wo -stage RO has been considered extensively as it is capable 

of generating less  conservative solutions  (Chassein et al .,  2018). However, traditional single -

level optimization models typically assume that the system designer and the network user share 7

aligned objectives or belong to the same decision -making entity. As a result, decisions are made 

centrally from a system -wide perspective, without accounting for the decentralized behaviors 

or diverse priorities of operational agents. This simplification m ay overlook critical conflicts 

and behavioral heterogeneity in real -world supply chain systems, potentially leading to 

unintended spillover effects on the economy and environment. Given the long -term and wide -

ranging impact of network design and facility l ocation decisions, it is essential to incorporate 

the decentralized nature of decision -making and the potential conflicts between strategic 

planners and operational users .

2. 2 Bilevel facility location 

BO, which reflects the  Stackelberg  leader -follower game , dates back to the early publications 

by Bracken  and  McGill (1973). This methodolog y is usually used to formulate a systematic 

optimization problem with a typical leader -follower hierarchical structure. Recent 

developments in BO under uncertainty have been  reviewed by Beck et al. (2023).  A series of 

network design and facility location have been studied using BO schemes . F or example,  a two -

stage stochastic  BO  model  was  applied to the established timberlands  supply c hai n for 

biorefinery investments, where harvester and manufacturer are the individual decision makers 

(Yeh et al., 2015) . Li e t al. (2021) studied a facility location problem considering  the boundedly 

rational attacker  and  probabilistic fortification .

Considering the facility disruption is a  kind of  risk  with high impact but low frequency , a

specific class of bilevel models , known as  facility  fortification  models,  has been developed to 

address such  problems (Scaparra and Church, 2008) . These models  follow  worst -case analysis 

and are typically formulated within a defend -attack framework, enabling the system designer 

to proactively safeguard against the most critical disruption scenarios, even without sufficient 

historical data.  The defender, as the leader , selects facilities to protect in order to minimize the 

worst -case loss of efficiency, while the attacker,  as the follower , tries to incur worst -case 

disruption impact by targeting unprotected facilities.  The facility fortification problem, as a 

special class of  BO  models, has been extensively studied under uncertainty (Zhang & Özaltın, 

2021; Zhang et al., 2022).  We mention that other types of BO FLP models are much less studied. 8

However,  compared to  SP  approaches,  RO  methods for handling uncertainty in  BO  models 

have  rarely  investigated (Beck et al., 2023) . Traditional  RO  formulations , such as the classic 

‘min –max’ structure , adds  another  level formulation on top of the underlying BO models.  This 

significantly increases the computational complexity and often makes the  robust BO  model s

intractable.  Xiong et al. (2021) proposed a robust bilevel resource recovery planning problem 

in the setting of the public and private partnership considering the uncertain feedstock condition, 

and reformulate equivalently to a mixed -integer linear program of reasonab le size. Li et al. 

(2023) made a robust b ilevel network design and pricing model  considering  yield uncertainty 

in biomass supply chain network, and converted it to a single  level optimization. Overall, the 

existing robust bilevel studies are based on particular model reformulations, then convert to a 

solvable form, which may require special structures of the original models. To the best of our 

knowledge, apart from Xu (2023),  no general solution algorithms exist that can exactly solve 

two -stage robust bilevel optimization models.  Xu (2023) propose d C&CG -BO that explicitly 

handles  general two -stage  robust bilevel  optimization. Nevertheless, we note that the standard 

C&CG -BO ’s is challenging for computational time. To do so, leveraging FLP ’s structures and 

properties to address practical -scale instances can effectively enhance the computation. 

Building on this foundation, we develop  an improved algorithm of  C&CG -BO , termed  C&CG -

BO -DDU, that exploit the structures and properties of  2-stage RBO -FLP to effectively address 

practical -scale instances.                                                                                        

> Table 1 Summary of related literature on facility location problem in facility location
> Authors Problem Uncertainty Level Stage SP/RO Solution method
> Snyder and Daskin (2005) P-median Supply Single One SPLagrangian relaxation
> Paul and Zhang (2019) Fixed -cost location Supply Single Two SPMIP
> Gülpınar et al., (201 3)Fixed -cost location Demand Single One RO MIP
> An et al. (2014) P-median Supply Single Two ROC&CG
> Cheng et al. (2021 a)Fixed -cost location Supply Single Two ROC&CG, affine policy
> Hansen et al. (2004) Fixed -cost location /Bilevel //Reformulation
> Lamontagne et al. (2023) Fixed -cost location /Bilevel //MIP
> Yeh et al., (2015) Supply chain allocation Supply Bilevel Two SPScenario programming
> Li et al. (2021) Fixed -cost location Supply Bilevel Two SPHybrid genetic algorithm
> Xiong, et al., (2021) Resource recovery plan Supply Bilevel Two ROReformulation
> Li et al., (202 3)Network design and pricing Supply Bilevel One ROKKT
> This paper Fixed -cost location Supply Bilevel Two ROC&CG framework 9

We summarized the features considered in the literature on the facility  location  problem  in 

Table 1, from the perspectives of  SP , RO, BO  and solution algorithm.  In summary, existing 

studies primarily have the following  issues:  1) RO and SP are  widely used for designing reliable 

and resilient supply chain networks, but  they  typically assume a single decision -maker by 

merging the roles of network designer and operator. This simplification overlooks the 

decentralized nature of real -world supply chains, where strategic planners and operational users 

may have distinct objectives  and concerns.  2)  BO  provides a natural way to capture  the 

hierarchical decision -making  proce ss , but its integration with robust methods to address low -

probability, high -impact disruptions remain s largely unexplored. In particular,  two -stage  robust 

bilevel models that incorporate facility disruption risk and decentralized operational behavior 

have received li ttle  attention. 

To  address  the above  issues , this paper proposes an integrated  two -stage RO and BO 

framework  that  models the strategic facility location decisions of the designer and the 

responsive allocation behaviors of the operator, under disruption  risk  scenarios.  Our work 

distinguishes itself by incorporating a decentralized decision -making perspective, explicitly 

accounting for the behavior of  the  network  user  within the context of  robust  facility  location .

To the best of our knowledge,  this paper presents both the f irst  model and exact solution 

algorithm (s) for two -stage  robust bilevel facility location problems. 

3.  Model Formulation 

3.1  Bilevel facility location formulation under facility disruption 

Consider a two -echelon  supply c hai n network  composed of  multiple capacitated facilities that 

serve a set of customers with a single product. Let  𝑁  denote  the set of customers,  and assume 

that the demand for each customer  𝑖  ∈ 𝑁  is known by  decision makers . The customers' 

demands are met by operable facilities, with each facility  𝑗  ∈ 𝐹  having a maximum capacity 

of  𝐾 𝑗 . Let  𝑐 𝑖𝑗  represent the unit  assignment cost to customer  𝑖  ∈ 𝑁  from supply facility  𝑗  ∈

𝐹 . Any unmet demand due to insufficient supply capacity is treated as a loss in the system and 

incurs a unit penalty  𝜌 𝑖  for  lost sales . We introduce  𝑢 𝑖  auxiliary variable to represent the 

unsatisfied demand at customer node  𝑖  ∈ 𝑁 .10 

We consider two decision makers: the network designer and the network user  with their 

distinguished  pursuit  in the system . The network designer  first  makes the strategic  location 

decision, aiming to optimize long -term performance metrics such as cost efficiency. Once the 

facilities are established, the network user responds by making supply allocation decisions with 

the goal of minimizing the total unmet demand, thereby ensuring a  high service level.  Thus, the 

whole  decision -making  process between the netwo rk designer (leader) and the network user 

(follower)  represents a  Stackelberg game , and can be  formulate d as a  BO  model.  In the upper -

level  problem, the network designer determines the optimal location to minimize the system 

total cost, including location cost, product allocation cost, and unmet demand penalt y. In the 

lower -level, the network user determines the optimal allocation decisions to minimize the total 

unmet demand. 

Recently, the increasing occurrence of black swan events has led to more frequent 

disruptions in supply facilities, resulting in significant uncertainty in facilit ies ’ supply  capacities. 

As facility disruption is a low -probability, high -impact risk , and existing data is often 

insufficient to have a  convincing  probability  distribution,  we adopt  two -stage RO  approach ,

instead of  the  traditional stochastic  optimization approaches,  to better handle such uncertainty. 

The complete  decision -making  sequence  and the involvement of disruptions  is shown in  Fig.2 

below : 

> Fig.2 The framework of two -stage robust bilevel facility location under facility disruption

As shown in  Fig.2 , the network designer (leader) is a here -and -now decision maker, 

making location decisions before the risk occurs. Once disruptions occur, the network user 

(follower) responds as a wait -and -see decision maker, optimizing allocation and unmet demand 

decisi ons. Unlike the  existing two -stage RO  model s, th e network user  at the operational leve l11 

is  different  from the strategic designer, and they have distinguished benefit concerns . Hence, 

when minimizing the total system cost,  the network designer  now  must account not only for 

facility disruption risks but also for the network user's behavior . Next,  we present the concrete 

mathematical model of our two -stage robust bilevel model for FLP, which is referred to as 2 -

stage RBO -FLP hereafter in this paper. 

Parameters 

𝑓 𝑗  = fixed cost to open a facility  𝑗  ∈ 𝐹 

𝑐 𝑖𝑗  = unit allocation cost on arc  (𝑖 , 𝑗 ) ∈ 𝒜 

𝐾 𝑗  = maximum  supply  capacity of facility  𝑗  ∈ 𝐹 

𝜌 𝑖  = unit penalty cost for  un met demand at customer node  𝑖  ∈ 𝑁 

𝑑 𝑖  = demand  quantity of customer node  𝑖  ∈ 𝑁 

𝑠 𝑗  = 1 if facility  𝑗  ∈ 𝐹  is  disrupted , 𝑠 𝑗  = 0 otherwise 

Decision variables 

𝑦 𝑗  = 1 if facility  𝑗  ∈ 𝐹  is opened,  𝑦 𝑗  = 0 otherwise 

𝑥 𝑖𝑗  = product allocation decision on arc  (𝑖 , 𝑗 )

Auxiliary variable 

𝑢 𝑖  = un met  demand at node  𝑖  ∈ 𝑁 

2-stage RBO -FLP 

𝑊 {𝑅𝐵𝑂 } = min  

> 𝒚 ∈{0,1}|𝐹 |

∑ 𝑓 𝑗  𝑦 𝑗 

> 𝑗 ∈𝐹

+ max   

> 𝒔 ∈𝒰

min  

> (𝒙 ,𝒖 )∈𝜙 (𝒚 ,𝒔 )

(∑ ∑ 𝑐 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑗 ∈𝐹 𝑖 ∈𝑁

𝑥 𝑖𝑗  + ∑ 𝜌 𝑖  𝑢 𝑖 

> 𝑖 ∈𝑁

) (1a) 

Where  𝜙 (𝒚 , 𝒔 ) is the optimal solution set of the following  lower -level  problem 

𝜙 (𝒚 , 𝒔 ) = min  

> 𝒙 ,𝒖

∑ 𝑢 𝑖 

> 𝑖 ∈𝑁

(1b) 

∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑖 ∈𝑁

≤ 𝐾 𝑗 𝑦 𝑗  (1 − 𝑠 𝑗  ) ∀𝑗  ∈ 𝐹  (1c) 

∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑗 ∈𝐹

+ 𝑢 𝑖  = 𝑑 𝑖  ∀𝑖  ∈ 𝑁  (1d) 

𝑥 𝑖𝑗  ≥ 0 ∀𝑖  ∈ 𝑁 , 𝑗  ∈ 𝐹  (1e) 

𝑢 𝑖  ≥ 0 ∀𝑖  ∈ 𝑁  (1f) 

𝒰  = {𝒔 | ∑ 𝑠 𝑗 𝑗 ∈𝐹  ≤ 𝛤 

𝑠 𝑗  ∈ {0,1} ∀𝑗  ∈ 𝐹 } (1g) 12 

The  upper -level objective  (1a ) is to  minimize the system total cost  including  fixed  location 

cost  and the  worst -case  disruption risk scenario allocation cost  and  unmet  penalty cost 

considering  lower -level ’s behavior.  The lower -level objective ( 1b) aims to minimize  the  total 

unmet demand to guarantee the service leve l after disruption risk scenarios are realized. 

Constraints (1c) model the facility capacity constraint after the disruption risk.  Constraints  (1d) 

mean that all demand is considered, whether allocated to a facility or unmet.  Constraint (1g) in 

the budget uncertain set models the disruption risk level, denoting the  total number of facilities 

being  disrupted . The other constraints  present individual  variables restriction s. To facilitate our 

following discussion, we let  𝑿 (𝒚 , 𝒔 ) denote the feasible set of the lower -level problem, i.e., the 

set  defined  by (1b)  - (1f). 

As can be seen in T able 1, FPL has been studied using two -stage RO scheme,  where first -

stage location decisions are made prior to the realization of disruption and second -stage 

allocation decisions are determined after  disruptions . As it is tightly related to 2 -stage RBO -

FLP, we next present the classical single level two -stage RO formulation, which is referred to 

as 2 -stage RO -FLP. 

𝑊 {𝑅𝑂 } = min  

> 𝒚 ∈{0,1}|𝐹 |

∑ 𝑓 𝑗  𝑦 𝑗 

> 𝑗 ∈𝐹

+ max   

> 𝒔 ∈𝒰

min   

> (𝒙 ,𝒖 )∈𝑿 (𝒚 ,𝒔 )

(∑ ∑ 𝑐 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑗 ∈𝐹 𝑖 ∈𝑁

𝑥 𝑖𝑗  + ∑ 𝜌 𝑖  𝑢 𝑖 

> 𝑖 ∈𝑁

) (1h) 

3.2 Structural  properties  of 2 -stage RBO -FLP 

In the context of BO, one key concept is the  high point problem , which simply drops off the 

lower -level  objective function and merges the lower -level constraints with the upper -level ones 

to build an augmented single level formulation.  Actually, this concept can be easily extended 

to the  2-stage RBO -FLP , and we note that the 2 -stage  RO -FLP  model actually serves as the 

high -point problem of the former. 

Proposition  1. (a) Any solution feasible to 2 -stage RO -FLP  is feasible to  2-stage RBO -FLP  too. 

(b) 2-stage  RO -FLP a relaxation to  2-stage RBO -FLP, and yields  a lower bound for the  2-stage 

RBO -FLP  model , i.e.,  𝑊 {𝑅𝑂 } ≤ 𝑊 {𝑅𝐵𝑂 }.

Proof.  Note that the second -stage lower -level problem in 2 -stage RBO -FLP is feasible for any 

(𝒚 , 𝒔 ). Also, 2 -stage RBO -FLP and 2 -stage  RO -FLP  share the same feasible set for the first 13 

stage and the uncertainty set.  Hence, the first statement is naturally valid. Regarding the second 

statement, given that  𝜙 (𝒚 , 𝒔 ) ⊆ 𝑿 (𝒚 , 𝒔 ) for arbitrary  (𝒚 , 𝒔 ), it simply follows.  □

Remark  1. With Proposition 1, it is clear that, under the two -stage RO context, 2 -stage RO -

FLP provides a simpler basis to  appreciate  2-stage RBO -FLP, which is  analogous  to what we 

have seen in the  literature  of  deterministic  BO. Hence, we note that it serves the high -poi nt 

problem of  2-stage RBO -FLP . There is also a distinct feature of  2-stage RBO -FLP  worth 

highlighting. Since the second -stage decision is completely determined by the follower in  2-

stage RBO -FLP , instead of saying that the second -stage has the  relati vely complete recourse 

property , we say the follower has the  relatively complete responsiveness  property , given 

that the lower -level problem has a finite optimal value for any  𝒚 , 𝒔  feasible to the first stage 

and belonging to  𝒰 .

Remark  2. If  𝑐 𝑖𝑗  = 0, 𝜌 𝑖  = 1, ∀𝑖  ∈ 𝑁 , 𝑗  ∈ 𝐹 , 2 -stage RBO -FLP  model  is also a special two -

stage robust single level optimization model.  In  this  case,  the lower -level and upper -level 

optimal solutions coincide.  This observation can be generalized to the following result. 

Proposition  3.  If  𝜌 𝑖  = 𝜌  ≥ max  {𝑐 𝑖𝑗 , ∀𝑖  ∈ 𝑁 , 𝑗  ∈ 𝐹 }, we have  𝑊 {𝑅𝐵𝑂 } = 𝑊 {𝑅𝑂 } .

Proof.  Consider a fixed 2 -tuple  (𝒚 ∗, 𝒔 ∗ ). There are two cases according to the total capacity 

from survived facilities. 

In the first case, we have enough total capacity to serve customers. It follows that for both  2-

stage RBO -FLP  and  2-stage  RO -FLP, we have  ∑ 𝑢 𝑖  

> ∗
> 𝑖 ∈𝑁

= 0, which renders  𝑢 𝑖  

> ∗

= 0 for all 

customers in any optimal solution to the recourse or the lower -level problem, respectively. 

Suppose that  (𝒙 ∗, 𝟎 ) ∈ 𝑿 (𝒚 ∗, 𝒔 ∗ ）is an optimal solution to the  recourse  problem of  2-stage 

RO -FLP. It is clearly optimal to the lower -level problem of  2-stage RBO -FLP , i.e.,  (𝒙 ∗, 𝒖 ∗) ∈

𝜙 (𝒚 ∗, 𝒔 ∗). Let  𝑊 {𝑅𝑂 } (𝒚 ∗ , 𝒔 ∗) and  𝑊 {𝑅𝐵𝑂 } (𝒚 ∗ , 𝒔 ∗ ) denote the second stage costs in  2-stage 

RBO -FLP  and  2-stage  RO -FLP respectively. We have  𝑊 {𝑅𝑂 } (𝒚 ∗, 𝒔 ∗ ) ≤ 𝑊 {𝑅𝐵𝑂 } (𝒚 ∗, 𝒔 ∗ ) ≤

𝑊 {𝑅𝑂 } (𝒚 ∗, 𝒔 ∗ ).

In the second case,  the total capacity from survived facilities is not sufficient to serve all 

customers. Let  𝑭 ̂ (𝒚 ∗, 𝒔 ∗) denote the set of survived facilities . Suppose that  (𝒙 ∗, ∑ 𝑑 𝑖 {𝑖 ∈𝑁 } −

∑ 𝐾 𝑗 {𝑗 ∈𝑭 ̂ (𝒚 ∗,𝒔 ∗)} ) ∈ 𝑿 (𝒚 ∗, 𝒔 ∗ ) is an optimal solution to the  recourse  problem of  2-stage  RO -FLP. 14 

Again, it is optimal to the lower -level problem of  2-stage RBO -FLP , i.e.,  (𝒙 ∗ , ∑ 𝑑 𝑖 {𝑖  ∈𝑁 } −

∑ 𝐾 𝑗 {𝑗 ∈𝑭 ̂ (𝒚 ∗,𝒔 ∗)} ) ∈ 𝑿 (𝒚 ∗, 𝒔 ∗ ) . By using the same argument to the first case, we have 

𝑊 {𝑅𝑂 } (𝒚 ∗, 𝒔 ∗ ) ≤ 𝑊 {𝑅𝐵𝑂 } (𝒚 ∗, 𝒔 ∗ ) ≤ 𝑊 {𝑅𝑂 } (𝒚 ∗, 𝒔 ∗ ).

For any  (𝒚 ∗, 𝒔 ∗), the conclusion  follows directly.  □

This implies that a high  unmet  penalty  encourages or facilitates  full cooperation between the 

network designer and the network user . Next, we illustrate the differences in  (𝒙 , 𝒖 ) between 

2-stage  RO -FLP  and  2-stage RBO -FLP  under a given location decision and disruption scenario 

(𝒚 , 𝒔 ) through an example  to  demonstrate that the optimal solution obtained from the  2-stage 

RBO -FLP  model fully utilizes the available capacity . As depicted in Fig. 3 , the diamond 

represents a supply facility, with the number inside indicating its maximum available supply 

capacity. The green area within the diamond represents the actual u sed  supply capacity. The 

circle represents a demand point, where the number inside denotes the demand quantity, and 

the yellow area within the circle represents the unmet demand. The transportation cost from the 

supply facility to the three demand points are 1 , 1, and 1. 41, respectively. The red lines represent 

allocation decisions in the  2-stage  RO -FLP  model, while the blue lines represent allocation 

decisions in the  2-stage RBO -FLP  model.        

> Fig.3 The differences in (𝒙 ,𝒖 )between 2-stage RO -FLP and 2-stage RBO -FLP

Case s 1, 2, and 3 i llustrate the impact of  unmet  penalt y on  (𝒙 , 𝒖 ). In the 2 -stage  RO -FLP 

model, if the transportation cost exceeds the  unmet  penalty, the corresponding demand will not 

be fulfilled, leading to wasted supply capacity (as indicated by the green area in the diamond 15 

being smaller than the total diamond area). However, in the  2-stage RBO -FLP  model, since the 

network users aim to minimize total  unmet demand , the network designer fully  uses  the 

available supply capacity to meet demand (as indicated by the green area in the diamond being 

equal to the total diamond area). The  2-stage RBO -FLP  model better reflects real -world 

scenarios  in which  ensuring supply after  the  disruption risk is critical,  highlighting the necessity 

of a bilevel modeling approach. Case s 4 and  5 demon strate that when no facilities are 

operational, the allocation decisions  (𝒙 , 𝒖 ) remain identical in both models. 

In the following, we consider another simple case where no  facility  will be built in an 

optimal solution. It can be easily proven by arguing that letting all demand unmet is  actually 

better than building and utilizing any facility. 

Proposition  4.  If  𝜌 𝑖  = 𝜌  ≤ min  {𝑐 𝑖𝑗 , ∀𝑖  ∈ 𝑁 , 𝑗  ∈ 𝐹 }, i.e. , the penalty for unmet demand is 

identical across all demand nodes and is lower than the minimum unit transportation co st.  The 

optimal solutions  (𝒚 , 𝒙 , 𝒖 ) of the  2-stage RBO -FLP  model  and the 2 -stage RO -FLP are both 

(𝟎 , 𝟎 , 𝒅 ).

Combining Propositions 3 and 4, it can be seen that  a low  unmet demand  penalty 

discourages  the cooperation between the  network designer  and  the network user , and a high 

penalty  promotes such cooperation.  In the next section , we develop an improved  and more 

efficient  algorithm,  C& CG -BO -DDU , to  solve  2-stage FLP -RBO that drastically improves its 

computational performance. 

4.  Solution methodology  based on C&CG framework 

Compared with the  standard  ‘min -max -min’ structure of  2-stage RO -FLP  model,  2-stage RBO -

FLP  model is more challenging to solve due to  the  additional lower -level ‘min’  problem 

embedded  in the second stage . Lots of  literature has proven the effectiveness of  (basic)  C&CG 

algorithm in solving  two -stage robust RO problems ( Zeng  and Zhao , 201 3; Cheng et al., 2021; 

Wang  and Qi, 2020 ).  Xu (2023) employed the  C&CG framework  and develop C&CG -BO to 

solve general two -stage robust bilevel problems. Similar to  basic  C&C G solving the 2 -stage 

RO -FLP  model  (See Appendix A) , C&CG -BO  involves solving  the  master problem (MP) and 

the  subproblem (SP) . Note that  MP , representing a BO model built with respect to a set of 16 

scenarios , derives  the optimal first -stage facility location  decision , and the SP is solved to 

identify the worst facility disruption scenario.  We highlight that, while the MP is a regular BO 

problem, SP is actually a pessimistic BO problem that is known much more difficult to solve 

(Wiesemann  et.al, 2013;  Zeng 202 0). Actually , in our  computationally  study, solving SP is the 

bottleneck of the whole solution process. Nevertheless, by leveraging a critical structure 

underlying the DDU set,  we  develop  C&CG -BO -DDU, which allows the SP to be solved 

drastically faster and, in turn,  improve our solution  capacity  on large -scale 2 -stage FLP -RBO 

instances by an order of magnitude. 

4.1 MP  of C&CG -BO 

For a set of given disruption scenarios  𝒔 𝑙  ∗, MP of C&CG -BO is a BO model as in the following: 

MP 

min  𝜂  (2a) 

𝜂  ≥ ∑ 𝑓 𝑗  𝑦 𝑗 

> 𝑗 ∈𝐹

+ ∑ ∑ 𝑐 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑗 ∈𝐹 𝑖 ∈𝑁

𝑥 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑙

+ ∑ 𝜌 𝑖  𝑢 𝑖 

> 𝑙
> 𝑖 ∈𝑁

𝑙  = 1,2,3 … , ℒ (2b) 

(𝒙 𝒍 , 𝒖 𝒍 ) ∈ 𝜙 𝑙  (𝒚 , 𝒔 𝒍 ∗) with 

𝜙 𝑙  (𝒚 , 𝒔 𝒍 ∗) = argmin 

{

∑ 𝑢 𝑖 

> 𝑙
> 𝑖 ∈𝑁

: ∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑙
> 𝑖 ∈𝑁

≤ 𝐾 𝑗  𝑦 𝑗  (1 − 𝑠 𝑗 

> 𝑙 ∗

) ∀𝑗  ∈ 𝐹 ;

∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑙
> 𝑗 ∈𝐹

+ 𝑢 𝑖  

> 𝑙

= 𝑑 𝑖  ∀𝑖  ∈ 𝑁 ;

𝒙 𝒍  ≥ 0, 𝒖 𝒍  ≥ 0 }

; 𝑙  = 1,2,3 … , ℒ

(2c) 

Note that allocation variables  𝑥 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑙

, auxiliary variables  𝑢 𝑖  

> 𝑙

and  𝜙 𝑙  (𝒚 , 𝒔 𝒍 ∗) are defined with 

respect to  𝑙 , indicating their associations with  𝑠 𝑗  

> 𝑙 ∗

, the  l-th  worst -case realization of uncertain 

variables  𝑠 𝑗  obtained by solving the corresponding SP in the  l-th  iteration. To convert it into a 

format that is readily computable for a solver,  𝜙 𝑙  (𝒚 ,𝒔 𝒍 ∗) can be replaced by the corresponding 

optimality conditions, e.g., KKT conditions, and then reformulated by linearization techniques 

to derive an equivalent MIP form of MP.  Th is  equivalent MIP  formulation  can be seen in 

Appendix B.1.  Since the  given  set of  disruption  scenario s is a subset of  𝒰 , MP is naturally a 

relaxation of  2-stage RBO -FLP  and provides a low er  bound .17 

4.2 SP of  C&CG -BO 

SP is solved to  identify the  worst  disruption risk scenarios  under given  𝒚 , which, in its original 

form, is written as :

SP -1

max  

> 𝒔 ∈𝒰

min 

> 𝑥 ,𝑢

∑ 𝑓 𝑗  𝑦 𝑗 

> ∗
> 𝑗

+ ∑ ∑ 𝑐 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑗 𝑖

𝑥 𝑖𝑗  + ∑ 𝜌 𝑖  𝑢 𝑖 

> 𝑖

(3a) 

(𝒙 , 𝒖 ) ∈ 𝜙 (𝒚 ∗, 𝒔 ) = argmin 

{

∑ 𝑢 𝑖 

> 𝑖

: ∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑖

≤ 𝐾 𝑗 𝑦 𝑗 ∗(1 − 𝑠 𝑗  ) ∀𝑗  ∈ 𝐹 

∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑗

+ 𝑢 𝑖  = 𝑑 𝑖  ∀𝑖  ∈ 𝑁 

𝒙  ≥ 0, 𝒖  ≥ 0 }

(3b) 

As mentioned,  SP -1 is a  challenging  pessimistic BO model  that actually has a three -level 

structure. Note that its structure prevents us from directly applying any optimality conditions 

to transform it into a  single level  MIP.  Zeng (2020) proposed a  level reduction technique  to 

address  such a challenging structure, which allows us to develop a simpler MIP equivalence of 

SP -1 that is readily computable. 

Proposition  5. The  pessimistic BO model SP -1 can be equivalently transferred to the following 

BO model  (referred to as  SP -BO ).

SP -BO 

max 

> 𝐬 ∈𝒰

∑ 𝑓 𝑗  𝑦 𝑗 ∗

> 𝑗

+ ∑ ∑ 𝑐 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑗 𝑖

𝑥 𝑖𝑗  + ∑ 𝜌 𝑖  𝑢 𝑖 

> 𝑖

(4a) 

∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑖

≤ 𝐾 𝑗 𝑦 𝑗  

> ∗

(1 − 𝑠 𝑗  ) ∀𝑗  ∈ 𝐹  (4b) 

∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑗

+ 𝑢 𝑖  = 𝑑 𝑖  ∀𝑖  ∈ 𝑁  (4c) 

𝒙  ≥ 0, 𝒖  ≥ 0 (4d) 

(𝒙 , 𝒖 ) ∈ 𝜙 ̃ (𝒚 ∗, 𝒔 , 𝒙 , 𝒖 ) = arg min 

{

∑ 𝑓 𝑗  𝑦 𝑗 

> ∗
> 𝑗

+ ∑ ∑ 𝑐 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑗 𝑖

𝑥 𝑖𝑗  + ∑ 𝜌 𝑖  𝑢 𝑖 

> 𝑖

:

∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑖

≤ 𝐾 𝑗 𝑦 𝑗 ∗(1 − 𝑠 𝑗  ) ∀𝑗  ∈ 𝐹 

∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑗

+ 𝑢 𝑖  = 𝑑 𝑖  ∀𝑖  ∈ 𝑁 

∑ 𝑢 𝑖 

> 𝑖

≤ ∑ 𝑢 𝑖 

> 𝑖

𝒙  ≥ 0, 𝒖  ≥ 0 }

(4e) 

Proof.  See Appendix C. 18 

Again,  SP -BO is a regular BO model that can be reformulated as an  MIP , referred to as SP -

MIP, which is presented in  Appendix B.2 . Note that solving SP -MIP  identifies the worst -case 

facility disruption scenario based on the given first -stage location decisions, thereby providing 

a valid upper bound for the  2-stage RBO -FLP  model. 

Noting that  𝒰  is a finite set and every iteration SP -MIP generates a new scenario, the next 

result regarding the convergence of C&CG -BO follows directly. 

Proposition  6. Algorithm  1 generates an optimal solution within a finite number of iterations. 

4. 3 Algorithm procedures with an enhancement strategy 

Although C&CG -BO can converge within a small number of iterations, we observe that solving 

SP -MIP , the reformulation of the pessimistic bilevel  subproblem , could be  extremely  time -

consuming, which leads to  a heavy computational burden in solving 2-stage RBO -FLP .

Fortunately, by exploiting the DDU structure of  𝒰 , C&CG -BO -DDU has a significant and 

critical impact on our solution approach. Recall that the assumption made in Section 3 can be 

directly captured by the following constraints .

𝑠 𝑗  ≤ 𝑦 𝑗  ∀𝑗  ∈ 𝐹  (4f) 

By incorporating (4f) into  𝒰  and revising the lower -level problem, we reformulate and have 

an alternative form of SP -1. 

SP -2

max  

> 𝒔 ∈𝒰 (𝑦 )

min  

> 𝑥 ,𝑢

∑ 𝑓 𝑗  𝑦 𝑗 ∗

> 𝑗

+ ∑ ∑ 𝑐 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑗 𝑖

𝑥 𝑖𝑗  + ∑ 𝜌 𝑖  𝑢 𝑖 

> 𝑖

(𝒙 , 𝒖 ) ∈ 𝜙 (𝒚 ∗, 𝒔 ) = argmin 

{

∑ 𝑢 𝑖 

> 𝑖

: ∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑖

≤ 𝐾 𝑗 𝑦 𝑗 ∗(1 − 𝑠 𝑗  ) ∀𝑗  ∈ 𝐹 

∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑖

≤ 𝐾 𝑗  𝑦 𝑗 ∗ ∀𝑗  ∈ 𝐹 

∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑗

+ 𝑢 𝑖  = 𝑑 𝑖  ∀𝑖  ∈ 𝑁 

𝒙  ≥ 0, 𝒖  ≥ 0 }

𝒰 (𝒚 ) = {𝒔 |

∑ 𝑠 𝑗 𝑗 ∈𝐹  ≤ 𝛤 

𝑠 𝑗  ≤ 𝑦 𝑗  ∀𝑗  ∈ 𝐹 

𝑠 𝑗  ∈ {0,1} ∀𝑗  ∈ 𝐹 

}

Proposition 7.  (a)  𝒰 (𝒚 ) is a subset of  𝒰 . (b)  SP -1 and SP -2 have the same optimal value. 

Proof.  As the first statement is clear, we consider the second statement only.  We first show that 19 

the optimal value of SP -1 is greater than or equal to that of SP -2. This is because SP -2 contains 

additional constraints of the form  ∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗 𝑖  ≤ 𝐾 𝑗  𝑦 𝑗 ∗ ∀𝑗  ∈ 𝐹  , which  lead to a  smaller  feasible 

region  and  SP -2 is solved over a subset of the feasible set of SP -1.

Next, we show that the optimal value of SP -2 is greater than or equal to that of SP -1. Consider 

the optimal solution  (𝒙 ∗, 𝒖 ∗) of SP -1 also satisfies the additional constraints in SP -2 —

namely  ∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗 𝑖  ≤ 𝐾 𝑗 𝑦 𝑗  

> ∗

∀𝑗  ∈ 𝐹  and  𝑠 𝑗  ≤ 𝑦 𝑗  ∀𝑗  ∈ 𝐹  — it is feasible in SP -2 as well. 

Combining both directions, we conclude that SP -1 and SP -2 have the same optimal value . □

Remark 3:  (1) We  highlight  that, after incorporating (4f),  𝒰  is converted into a DDU set, 

which, according to Proposition 7, helps us reduce the search space of  𝒔 . In our numerical 

experiments, such reduction has a great and positive  impact  on solving SP. Actually, the 

computation can speed up by more  than  one order of  magnitude , which drastically improves 

our solution capacity to the large and challenging SP problems. Regarding MP in section 4.1, 

we do not make any changes . (2) Such a great computational performance enhancement verifies 

and strengthens one observation made in Zeng and Wang (2022) that converting  an  uncertain 

set into a  DDU  set could advance  our  computational  capacity  significantly.  Hence, we do 

believe that such conver sion and related techniques are important future  research topics .

4.4 Algorithm  Framework 

In summary of the above proposition and analysis,  our C&CG -BO -DDU  for two -stage RBO -

FLP  is shown in Fig. 4 and the detailed  procedure is  given  in Algorithm  1.                                                         

> Algorithm 1 : C&CG -BO -DDU algorithm for the 2-stage RBO -FLP model
> Step1 Initialization: Let lower bound 𝐿𝐵 =−∞, upper bound 𝑈𝐵 =+∞, iterations 𝑙 =0,𝒔 0∗=0,𝜖 =0.1% .
> Step2 Solve the MP -MIP to obtain optimal location decision 𝒚 ∗. Set 𝐿𝐵 =𝑚𝑎𝑥 {𝐿𝐵 ,𝜂 }.
> Step3 Solve the SP -MIP to find the worst -case disruption risk scenario 𝒔 𝑙 ∗. Let 𝜓 be the objective value of the SP. Set
> 𝑈𝐵 =𝑚𝑖𝑛 {𝜓 ,𝑈𝐵 }.
> Step4 If 𝐺𝑎𝑝 =𝑈𝐵 −𝐿𝐵
> 𝑈𝐵 ≤𝜖 , the algorithm terminates; else, set 𝑙 =𝑙 +1, add the identified worst -case disruption risk
> scenario 𝒔 𝑙 ∗and its corresponding recourse decision variables and constraints to the MP -MIP and go to Step2 .20
> Fig.4 The C&CG -BO -DDU algorithm for the 2-stage RBO -FLP model

5.  Numerical study and analysis 

In this section, we conduct computational experiments to evaluate the performance of the 

proposed  2-stage RBO -FLP  model in comparison with the traditional  2-stage RO -FLP  model. 

Specifically, we compare key metrics including total cost, service level, unit service cost, and 

average supply capacity utilization.  Finally , we further analyze the conditions under which 

centralized or decentralized decision -making structures are more appropriate . The algorithm is 

implemented in Python and executed on a PC equipped  with an Intel i7 2.60 GHz processor, 16 

GB RAM, and a 64 -bit Windows 10 operating system. All models are solved using Gurobi 9.0. 

5.1 Generation of random data  sets and basic experimental set ting 

The test dataset is constructed based on a primary dataset of 49 points (Daskin, 2011). To 

enhance diversity, we generate an additional dataset of the same size and merge them. A subset 

of  46  points is then randomly selected for testing, ensuring that the attributes of the generated 

data remain within the range of the original dataset. From the test dataset, six points are 

randomly designated as potential supply facilities, while the remaining  points serve as customer 

nodes. The other model parameters are d etailed in Table 2.             

> Table 2 Template for the values of parameters
> Parameters Values Parameters Values
> 𝑑 𝑖 the state population *10 −4𝜌 𝑖 0.01 ∗∑𝑓 𝑗
> 𝑗 ∈𝐹
> /|𝐹 |

21 

5.2 The performance  of the C&CG algorithm 

In this section, we  show  the performance of the proposed C&CG algorithm , and specifically 

compare the basic C&CG -BO  algorithm with its improved version , C&CG -BO -DDU , under 

different disruption risk levels  𝛤 . To do so, we use  |𝐹 | and  |𝑁 | to  represent the cardinality 

of sets  𝐹  and  𝑁  , respectively.  The column "Ratio" indicates the relative difference in 

computation  time between the basic C&CG -BO  and C&CG -BO -DDU  algorithms, with smaller 

values meaning faster solving time for C&CG -BO -DDU . As shown in Table 3, C&CG -BO -

DDU generally reduces and  computation  time compared to the basic C&CG -BO  algorithm. As 

expected, solving time increases as  |𝐹 | grows, highlighting the need for scalable 

approximation algorithms for large -scale scenarios in future research.                                                                  

> Table 3Computational Performance for algorithm
> (|𝐹 |,|𝑁 |)=(6,40 )(|𝐹 |,|𝑁 |)=(10 ,40 )(|𝐹 |,|𝑁 |)=(20 ,30 )
> 𝛤
> C&CG -BO
> Time (sec)
> C&CG -BO -DDU
> Time (sec)
> Ratio
> C&CG -BO
> Time (sec)
> C&CG -BO -DDU
> Time (sec)
> Ratio
> C&CG -BO
> Time (sec)
> C&CG -BO -DDU
> Time (sec)
> Ratio
> 115 25 63 %5921 3995 -33 %18050 19016 5%
> 272 16 -77 %7750 4582 -41 %51909 20876 -60%
> 339 15 -62 %11058 4356 -61 %148410 163194 10 %
> 446 13 -72 %23859 6067 -75 %74279 60910 -18 %
> 548 15 -69 %44749 2058 -95 %271711 21214 -92 %

5.3 The impact of d isruption risk level  on the 2 -stage RBO -FLP & 2 -stage RO -FLP 

In this section, we analyze the impact of the facility disruption risk level  𝛤  on the total system 

cost  and service level  of the  2-stage RBO -FLP  in comparison with  2-stage  RO -FLP  models. 

Fig. 5  illustrates the total  service volume and total cost  of two models  under increasing levels 

of disruption risk, denoted by markers 0 to 6.  As observed in  Fig. 5 , the total cost for both 

models increase with a higher disruption risk level. However, the red line consistently lies 

below the blue line, indicating that the total system cost of the 2 -stage  RO -FLP  model never 

exceeds that of the  2-stage RBO -FLP  model.  This resu lt confirms that the 2 -stage  RO -FLP 

model serves as a  relaxation  of the  2-stage RBO -FLP  model, providing a lower bound for its            

> 𝑓 𝑗 median home value in the city *10 −2𝐾 𝑗 1.2∗∑𝑑 𝑖
> 𝑖 ∈𝑁
> /|𝐹 |
> 𝑐 𝑖𝑗 the distance between nodes 𝑖 and 𝑗 22

total cost. In real -world scenarios,  the  network designer  of  the  2-stage RBO -FLP  model must 

account not only for minimizing total system cost but also for reducing overall  unmet demand 

at the operational level, leading to additional cost considerations. 

Although the  2-stage RBO -FLP  model incurs a higher total cost,  however,  it  achieves a 

higher level of service coverage.  To further illustrate the advantage of the  2-stage RBO -FLP 

model, we introduce the concept of unit service cost  (USC) defined as the cost for meeting unit 

service to  reflects  the  service efficiency . A lower unit service cost indicates higher efficiency in 

resource utilization. We evaluate the unit service cost of both models under disruption risk 

levels 0 to 5 (risk level 6 is excluded as  no facilities are open, resulting in a total assignment of 

zero). The results are shown in Fig.  6, which demonstrates that the  2-stage RBO -FLP  model 

generally provides a more efficient level of service.      

> Fig.5 The impact of the disruption risk level Fig.6 The unit service cost of the 2 -stage RO -FLP model

To reflect the condition under which the two models apply, we introduce the concept of 

cost ratio and service ratio, of the model 2 -stage RBO -FLP to model 2 -stage RO -FLP. The 

experiment results are shown in Fig. 7, of which t he x -axis represents the cost ratio, while the 

y-axis shows the  service  ratio. Each point corresponds to a risk level  and  the red dashed line 

indicates the threshold where the increase in cost is exactly matched by the increase in fulfilled 

demand . Points located above the red line indi cate that the  2-stage RBO -FLP  model achieves a 

greater improvement in  service  than th at  in cost. In such cases, the d ecentralized structure 

decision  model, i.e. 2 -stage RBO -FLP  leads to higher service efficiency compared to the 

centralized structure  decision model,  2-stage  RO -FLP . Conversely, points below the line 

suggest the centralized strategy of the 2 -stage  RO -FLP  model offers better cost -effectiveness. 

Most of the points lie above this reference line, indicating that the  2-stage RBO -FLP  model 

often del ivers a greater proportional improvement in  service  than total cost. This highlights the       

> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> 120
> 012345
> Unit service cost
> Disruption risk level
> 2-stage RBO FLP 2-stage RO FLP 23

necessity of adopting the  2-stage RBO -FLP  model in many real -world scenarios , where a 

moderate increase in investment can lead to significantly improved service guarantees.      

> Fig.7 Cost and assignment ratio Fig.8 Supply capacity utilizatio n

5.4 The analysis of the  average supply capacity utilization 

In this section, we analyze the effective utilization of available supply capacity to validate the 

results of Fig.  3. Specifically, we define average supply capacity utilization as the ratio between 

the total actually allocated supply  capacity  and the total available supply capacity across all 

facilities. This metric reflects how efficiently the model makes use of the system's potential 

supply  capacity . Th e average supply capacity utilization can be influenced by disruption risk 

(as seen in Case 5 of Fig.  3) or by insufficient allocation (corresponding to the 2 -stage  RO -FLP 

results in Cases 2 and 3 of Fig.  3).  The detailed formulation of the  average supply capacity 

utilization  𝜔  can be seen as follows: 

𝜔  = ∑ (∑ 𝑥 𝑖 𝑗 

> ∗
> 𝑖 ∈𝑁

𝑦 𝑗  

> ∗

∗ 𝐾 𝑗 

)

> 𝑗 ∈𝐹

/ ∑ 𝑦 𝑗 

> ∗
> 𝑗 ∈𝐹

Where  𝑦 𝑗  

> ∗

and  𝑥 𝑖𝑗  

> ∗

are the optimal solutions obtained by  calculating  the 2 -stage RO -FLP 

model and the 2 -stage RBO -FLP model respectively.  We calculate the average supply capacity 

utilization  𝜔  of the  above two models  under different disruption levels, with the results shown 

in Fig.  8. The red curve, representing the results of the 2 -stage  RO -FLP  model, is  low er than 

the blue curve, which represents the results of the  2-stage RBO -FLP  model. This indicates that 

the 2 -stage  RO -FLP  model does not fully account for the  concerns  of the network user, leading 

to underutilization of available capacity. In contrast, the  2-stage RBO -FLP  model exhibits 

higher  average supply capacity utilization  and thus provides a more realistic representation of        

> 0.00
> 0.20
> 0.40
> 0.60
> 0.80
> 1.00
> 0123456
> Supply capacity utilization
> Disruption risk level
> 2-stage RBO-FLP 2-stage RO-FLP 24

emergency supply allocation after disruptions, better reflecting practical supply assurance 

needs. 

Under a specific  disruption risk level of  𝛤  = 2, Fig.  9 presents the solutions of the 2 -stage 

RO -FLP  model and the  2-stage RBO -FLP  model. The black dashed lines in  Fig. 9  represent the 

specific allocation decisions between supply points (blue squares) and demand points (yellow 

circles).  In Fig.  9a, the 2 -stage  RO -FLP  model results in sparse allocations —primarily due to 

the high transportation cost relative to the unmet demand penalty, causing the network designer 

to sacrifice allocation coverage to minimize total cost. In contrast, Fig.  9b shows that the  2-

stage RBO -FLP  model achieves significantly  higher allocation under the same number of 

available supply facilities. This highlights the advantage of the  2-stage RBO -FLP  model by 

accounting for the  service level of customers .     

> Fig.9a The solution of the 2 -stage RO -FLP model Fig.9b The solution of the 2 -stage RBO -FLP model
> Fig.9 The comparison of the solutions

5.5 The impact of the un met demand penalty cost  under varying disruption risk level 

In Section 3, we  present the  Proposition  3 and Proposition  4 for  analyzing the impact of  the 

unmet demand penalty cost  efficient  𝜌 𝑖  on the 2 -stage  RO -FLP  and  2-stage RBO -FLP  models. 

In this section, we further investigate  this  effect under different facility disruption risk levels. 

We assume that the unmet demand penalty cost  𝜌 𝑖  is uniform across all  demand points ,

denoted as  𝜌 , and set to the 0th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 100th percentiles of  𝑐 𝑖𝑗  for all  𝑖  ∈ 𝑁 , 𝑗  ∈

𝐹  , where the 0th and 100th percentiles correspond to the minimum and maximum values, 

respectively . For each disruption risk level and penalty cost scenario, we compute the total 25 

number of open facilities  of the  2-stage  RO -FLP  and  2-stage RBO -FLP  models, denoted as 

∑ 𝑦 𝑗 𝑆 ∗ 

> 𝑗

and  ∑ 𝑦 𝑗 𝐵 ∗ 

> 𝑗

, as well as the total allocated  capacity , denoted as  ∑ ∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑆 ∗
> 𝑗 𝑖

and 

∑ ∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝐵 ∗
> 𝑗 𝑖

. Here, the superscript  𝑆  represents results from the 2 -stage  RO -FLP  model, while 

𝐵  represents results from the  2-stage RBO -FLP  model.  The impact of the un met demand 

penalty cost  on 2 -stage RBO -FLP and 2 -stage RO -FLP models under varying disruption risk 

level are depicted in Fig. 10, where horizon axis and left vertical axis represent disruption risk 

level and penalty cost coefficient 𝜌 in percentile of  transportation cost respectively. 

Fig. 10a illustrates the difference  ∑ 𝑦 𝑗 𝑆 ∗ 

> 𝑗

− ∑ 𝑦 𝑗 𝐵 ∗ 

> 𝑗

under varying facility disruption risk 

levels  𝛤  and unmet demand penalty  coefficient  𝜌  relative to transportation cost. Darker 

colors indicate larger differences, meaning the 2 -stage  RO -FLP  model tends to open more 

facilities. White areas represent a difference of zero, implying that both models open the same 

number of facilities.  As shown in Fig. 10a, the 2 -stage  RO -FLP  model generally results in a 

higher number of open facilities , which  aligns with the earlier average supply capacity 

utilization analysis and highlights a key distinction between the two models. In the  2-stage 

RBO -FLP  model, the network designer accounts for  user ’s decisions, leading to more 

conservative facility  location  decisions in response to disruption risks. Consequently, 

decentralized decision -making in the  2-stage RBO -FLP  model tends to be more cautious 

compared to the centralized decision -making in the 2 -stage  RO -FLP  model, resulting in fewer 

open facilities. 

Fig. 10b illustrates the difference  ∑ ∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑆 ∗
> 𝑗 𝑖

− ∑ ∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝐵 ∗
> 𝑗 𝑖

under varying facility disruption 

risk levels  𝛤  and unmet demand penalty  efficient  𝜌 . The red color spectrum indicates higher 

total allocation in the 2 -stage  RO -FLP  model  (∑ ∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑆 ∗
> 𝑗 𝑖

≥ ∑ ∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝐵 ∗
> 𝑗 𝑖

),  while the blue spectrum 

represents higher total allocation in the  2-stage RBO -FLP  model  (∑ ∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝐵 ∗
> 𝑗 𝑖

≥ ∑ ∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑆 ∗
> 𝑗 𝑖

). 

Dark er shades reflect larger differences between the two models.  As shown in Fig. 10b, when 

the disruption risk level is relatively low ( 𝛤  ≤ 3), the  2-stage RBO -FLP  model exhibits higher 

total allocation. However, under high disruption risk levels and high unmet demand penalties 

(e.g., in the lower -right region of Fig. 10b), the 2 -stage  RO -FLP  model results in greater total 

allocation.  These findings highlight an important managerial insight: under low -risk conditions, 

upper -level network designers should fully account for lower -level network users' objectives  in 26 

a decentralized way  to ensure effective supply allocation in disruption scenarios. Conversely, 

when facing significant risks, lower -level network users should  completely  collaborate with 

upper -level network designers  in a centralized way  to mitigate risk more effectively.  Finally, 

the first row of  the  results in Fig. 10a and Fig. 10b validates Proposition 4, confirming that 

when the  unmet  penalty is  very  low, t he optimal solutions  (𝒚 , 𝒙 , 𝒖 ) of the  2-stage RBO -FLP 

model  and the 2 -stage RO -FLP are both  (𝟎 , 𝟎 , 𝒅 ). Consequently,  ∑ 𝑦 𝑗 𝑆 ∗ 

> 𝑗

− ∑ 𝑦 𝑗 𝐵 ∗ 

> 𝑗

= 0 and 

∑ ∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑆 ∗
> 𝑗 𝑖

− ∑ ∑ 𝑥 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝐵 ∗
> 𝑗 𝑖

= 0.   

> Fig.10a The analysis of location decisions Fig.10b The analysis of allocation decisions
> Fig.10 The impact of the un met demand penalty cost under different risk level

6.  Conclusion 

In this paper, we present a  2-stage RBO -FLP model  under facility disruption , by which, the 

network designer makes location decisions  with minimum total cost  before disruption  risk, and 

network user  makes optimal allocation and unmet decisions with  minimum  total  unmet demand 

to g uarantee  service level  after disruption  risk  occur s in a decentralized  way.  By utilizing 

C&CG -BO -DDU, we adopt an enhanced approach to address the  complex  SP  by  reducing the 

search space of the  worst -case  disruption  scenario  and impr ove the efficiency of solving the 

two -stage  RBO -FLP  drastically . The MP is a  regular  BO with multiple lower -level problems, 

while the SP is a pessimistic BO model. Through a series of reformulations,  both the master 

and subproblems can ultimately be transformed into  mixed -integer  programming formulation 

that can be directly solved using existing  optimization  solvers.  Through numerical experiments, 

we demonstrate that compared to the two -stage robust single -level optimization model  (2 -stage 

RO -FLP) , the prop osed  2-stage RBO -FLP  achieves a better balance between cost investment 27 

and  service level  when facing facility disruption risk.  Some theoretical properties are proposed 

and experiments are conducted to show the superiority of the proposed 2 -stage RBO -FLP model 

in comparison with 2 -stage RO -FLP model.  Th e 2-stage RBO -FLP  model  extends both robust 

facility location problems and bilevel facility location problems  and the e nhancement strategy 

algorithm incorporating the DDU set can also be extended to improve the computational 

efficiency of other  RO  problems  by  reducing the search space of the uncertain scenarios .

Some managerial insights can be drawn as follows : 1)  The baseline comparison between  2-

stage RBO -FLP  and 2 -stage  RO -FLP  provides valuable guidance for managers in choosing 

between centralized and decentralized decision -making structures. By evaluating the trade -offs 

between total cost and service efficiency, managers can identify the more appropriate strategy 

under disrupt ion risk. In many cases,  the 2 -stage RBO -FLP with  decentralized decision -making 

leads to lower unit service costs, indicating higher serv ice efficiency and better responsiveness 

to local demand conditions.  2)  By incorporating the operational -level objective of minimizing 

total unmet demand, the network designer can  improve  average supply capacity utilization and 

better meet overall demand.  3)  When facing lower levels of disruption risk and unmet demand 

penalty, adopting a decentralized decision -making structure can improve demand fulfillment 

by allowing the network designer to better accommodate the user’s operational preferences. In 

contras t, under high  disruption risk level  and  severe unmet demand penalties, a centralized 

approach is more appropriate, enabling closer coordination between the network designer and 

user to implement more effective risk mitigation strategies.         

> Reference
> Ahmadi Digehsara, A., Ardestani -Jaafari, A., Mazahir, S., & Fathi, M. (2023). Two -stage nodal network
> interdiction under decision -dependent uncertainty. Annals of Operations Research: 1 -23.
> An, Y., Zeng, B., Zhang, Y., & Zhao, L. (2014). Reliable p -median facility location problem: two -stage
> robust models and algorithms. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 64, 54 -72.
> Baron, O., Milner, J., & Naseraldin, H. (2011). Facility location: A robust optimization approach.
> Production and Operations Management, 20(5), 772 -785.
> Beck, Y., Ljubić, I., & Schmidt, M. (2023). A survey on bilevel optimization under uncertainty. European
> Journal of Operational Research, 311(2), 401 -426.
> Ben -Tal, A., Goryashko, A., Guslitzer, E., & Nemirovski, A. (2004). Adjustable robust solutions of
> uncertain linear programs. Mathematical programming, 99(2), 351 -376.
> Bracken, J., & McGill, J. T. (1973). Mathematical programs with optimization problems in the constraints.
> Operations Research, 21(1), 37 –44. 28

Camacho -Vallejo, J. F., López -Vera, L., Smith, A. E., & González -Velarde, J. L. (2022). A tabu search 

algorithm to solve a green logistics bi -objective bi -level problem.  Annals of Operations Research,  316(2), 

927 -953. 

Chassein, A., Goerigk, M., Kasperski, A., & Zieliński, P. (2018). On recoverable and two  -stage robust 

selection problems with budgeted uncertainty.  European Journal of Operational Research,  265(2), 423 -

436. 

Cheng, C., Adulyasak, Y., & Rousseau, L. M. (2021). Robust facility location under demand uncertainty 

and facility disruptions. Omega, 103, 102429. 

Cui, T., Ouyang, Y., & Shen, Z. J. M. (2010). Reliable facility location design under the risk of disruptions. 

Operations research,  58(4 -part -1), 998 -1011. 

Daskin, M. (1997). Network and discrete location: models, algorithms and applications. Journal of the 

Operational Research Society, 48(7), 763 -764. 

Daskin,  M.S.,  Snyder,  L.V.,  & Berger,  R.T.  (2005)  Facility location in supply chain  design  Logistics 

systems  Design  and  optimization  (pp.39 –65)  Springer. 

Feng, Y., Chen, Y., & Liu, Y. (2023). Optimising two -stage robust supplier selection and order allocation 

problem under risk -averse criterion.  International Journal of Production Research,  61(19), 6356 -6380. 

Gülpınar, N., Pachamanova, D., & Çanakoğlu, E. (2013). Robust strategies for facility location under 

uncertainty.  European Journal of Operational Research,  225(1), 21 -35. 

Hansen P, Kochetov Y, Mladenovic N (2004) Lower bounds for the uncapacitated facility location 

problem with user preferences, Preprint G -2004 -24, Mart 2004. GERAD -HEC, Montreal, Canada 

Lamontagne, S., Carvalho, M., Frejinger, E., Gendron, B., Anjos, M. F., & Atallah, R. (2023).  Optimising 

electric vehicle charging station placement using advanced discrete choice models.  INFORMS Journal 

on Computing,  35(5), 1195 -1213. 

Li, Q., Li, M., Zhang, R., & Gan, J. (2021). A stochastic bilevel model for facility location  -protection 

problem with the most likely interdiction strategy. Reliability Engineering & System Safety, 216, 108005. 

Li, Q., Üster, H., & Zhang, Z. H. (2023). A bilevel model for robust network design and biomass pricing 

under farmers’ risk attitudes and supply uncertainty. Transportation Science, 57(5), 1296  -1320. 

Liu, S., Kong, N., Parikh, P., & Wang, M. (2023). Optimal trauma care network redesign with government 

subsidy: a bilevel integer programming approach.  Omega,  119, 102885. 

Noyan, N., Balcik, B., & Atakan, S. (2016). A stochastic optimization model for designing last mile relief 

networks.  Transportation Science,  50(3), 1092 -1113. 

Paul, J. A., & Zhang, M. (2019). Supply location and transportation planning for hurricanes: A two  -stage 

stochastic programming framework.  European Journal of Operational Research,  274(1), 108 -125. 

Rahmati, R., Bashiri, M., Nikzad, E., & Siadat, A. (2022). A two -stage robust hub location problem with 

accelerated Benders decomposition algorithm.  International Journal of Production Research,  60(17), 

5235 -5257 .

Scaparra, M. P., & Church, R. L. (2008). A bilevel mixed -integer program for critical infrastructure 

protection planning.  Computers & Operations Research,  35(6), 1905 -1923. 

Snyder, L. V., & Daskin, M. S. (2005). Reliability models for facility location: the expected failure cost 

case.  Transportation science,  39(3), 400 -416. 

Snyder, L. V., Atan, Z., Peng, P., Rong, Y., Schmitt, A. J., & Sinsoysal, B. (2016). OR/MS models for 

supply chain disruptions: A review.  Iie transactions,  48(2), 89 -109. 

Wang, Z., & Qi, M. (2020). Robust service network design under demand uncertainty.  Transportation 29 

Science,  54(3), 676 -689. 

Wiesemann, W., Tsoukalas, A., Kleniati, P. M., & Rustem, B. (2013). Pessimistic bilevel opti mization. 

SIAM Journal on Optimization,  23(1), 353 -380 

Xiong, J., Wang, S., & Ng, T. S. (2021). Robust bilevel resource recovery planning.  Production and 

Operations Management,  30(9), 2962 -2992. 

Xu, L. (2023). A Study on Multilevel Optimization Subject to Uncertainty (Doctoral dissertation, 

University of Pittsburgh). 

Yeh, K., Whittaker, C., Realff, M. J., & Lee, J. H. (2015). Two stage stochastic bilevel programming 

model of a pre -established timberlands supply chain with biorefinery investment interests.  Computers & 

Chemical Engineering,  73, 141 -153. 

Yin, Y., Wang, J., Chu, F., & Wang, D. (2024). Distributionally robust multi -period humanitarian relief 

network design integrating facility location, supply inventory and allocation, and evacuation 

planning.  International Journal of Production Research,  62 (1 -2), 45 -70. 

Zeng, B. (2020). A practical scheme to compute the pessimistic bilevel optimization problem.  INFORMS 

Journal on Computing,  32(4), 1128 -1142. 

Zeng, B., & Wang, W. (2022). Two -stage robust optimization with decision dependent uncertainty.  arXiv 

preprint arXiv:2203.16484. 

Zeng, B., & Zhao, L. (2013). Solving two -stage robust optimization problems using a column -and -

constraint generation method.  Operations Research Letters,  41(5), 457 -461. 

Zhang, J., & Özaltın , O. Y. (2021). Bilevel integer programs with stochastic right -hand sides. INFORMS 

Journal on Computing, 33(4), 1644 -1660. 

Zhang, K., Li, X., & Jin, M. (2022). Efficient solution methods for a general r -interdiction median 

problem with fortification. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 34(2), 1272  -1290.