Title: Geometric–Nongeometric Optimizer Calculus: A Modular Language for Reachable Gradient Methods

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.07206v1

Published Time: Thu, 09 Jul 2026 00:41:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Geometric–Nongeometric Optimizer Calculus: A Modular Language for Reachable Gradient Methods 

Zavier Li zavierli888@gmail.com Xidian University Xi’an, China 

# Abstract 

Adaptive optimizers mix several mechanisms: a metric or preconditioner maps gradients to descent directions, while estimation, memory, step-size control, constraints, stochasticity, target modification, and discretization determine which directions are available and how they are used. We introduce geometric–nongeometric optimizer calculus , a modular language for auditing reachable gradient methods under explicit oracle, budget, state, and rule constraints. The geometric module is a positive cometric family that maps covectors to parameter-space directions; the nongeometric modules are information, memory, control, operator, noise, target, and discretization mechanisms. The main formal result is a direction-expressivity theorem: away from critical points, full positive-definite geometry expresses exactly the strict descent directions. We then define restricted direction residuals for admissible metric families, prove exact expressivity conditions for diagonal and block geometries, and separate this direction-level diagnostic from condition-number geometric complexity. The resulting design problem is a Pareto optimization over module budgets, not a single universal optimizer ordering. We also lift pointwise residuals to a trajectory-level residual complexity that couples direction mismatch with the variation of the explaining geometry. We include diagnostic prototypes only as evidence for the language: a high-information full-metric probe solves deterministic quadratic benchmarks to numerical precision, while a practical Muon-style PyTorch candidate gives small-scale evidence that matrix-operator updates can be audited by the calculus. The paper is a theory and benchmark-language manuscript; it does not claim large-scale optimizer state-of-the-art performance. 

# 1 Introduction 

Gradient-based optimization is usually described through update formulas: stochastic gradient descent adds noise through mini-batches, momentum stores a velocity, Adam rescales coordinates using moment estimates, Shampoo and K-FAC use structured curvature approximations, and quasi-Newton methods build secant memories. These descriptions are operationally useful, yet they mix several roles. Some parts define a geometry: a positive map from the gradient covector to a descent direction. Other parts decide what information is visible, which past quantities are remembered, how step sizes are controlled, whether constraints or projections are applied, how much randomness is injected, whether the objective is changed, and how a continuous idea is discretized. This paper proposes a language for separating these roles. We call it geometric–nongeometric optimizer calculus . The geometric module is a positive cometric or preconditioner family, possibly restricted to diagonal, block, Kronecker, low-rank, or proxy forms. The nongeometric side is split into seven modules: information, memory, control, operator, noise, target, and discretization. The split is designed as an audit language for reachable gradient methods. It lets us ask whether a given update direction is explained by a metric family, which residual mechanisms remain, and how the answer changes under oracle, memory, communication, or compute budgets. This paper is the optimizer-level companion to two preceding dynamic geometric optimization papers. Opti-mization geometrodynamics studies optimization as a coupled evolution of parameter trajectory, transported 1arXiv:2607.07206v1 [cs.LG] 8 Jul 2026 distribution, and time-varying positive-definite metric, including invariant obstructions and affine-invariant metric costs (Li, 2026a). Restricted dynamic geometric complexity then studies condition-number reachability inside diagonal, block, Kronecker, low-rank, and proxy metric families (Li, 2026b). The present paper does not require those papers as prerequisites: its definitions, direction-expressivity results, restricted residuals, and diagnostic prototypes are stated self-containedly. We use the distinction between full geometry, re-stricted geometry, and residual mechanisms as motivation, then lift it from metric evolution to optimizer design. In this setting, full positive-definite geometry is an expression envelope, restricted geometry is an implementable family, and nongeometric modules are budgeted mechanisms that cannot be collapsed into a positive parameter-space metric without losing information. 

Central question. The question is not whether every possible algorithmic behavior can be called geometry. If an arbitrary residual vector is allowed, any update can be encoded and the language becomes vacuous. The useful question is: Given an oracle class, a budget, a state class, and admissible rules, can reachable gradient methods be decomposed into a positive geometric module and structured nongeometric modules in a way that exposes expression gaps, mechanism budgets, and optimizer-design tradeoffs? We address this by giving a formal module language, direction-level expressivity theorems, restricted residual diagnostics, and a Pareto formulation of optimal optimizer design. We do not prove a universal representation theorem for arbitrary optimizer code. The formal claims are local or class-relative: they hold after the oracle, budget, state variables, rules, target, and geometric family have been declared. 

Contributions. The main contributions are: 1. We define a geometric–nongeometric optimizer calculus for continuous and discrete gradient methods. The geometric module is a positive cometric family; the nongeometric modules are information, memory, control, operator, noise, target, and discretization. 2. We prove a pointwise full-geometry expressivity theorem: when g = ∇f (θ)̸ = 0 , a direction u is exactly 

u = −P g for some P ≻ 0 if and only if g⊤u < 0. Thus full positive-definite geometry expresses exactly strict descent directions away from critical points. 3. We define restricted direction residuals ρF,h (u; α) for a metric family F under a reference metric h, and prove exact diagonal and block expressivity conditions. The residual gives a direction-level analogue of restricted dynamic geometric complexity for the optimizer-level setting. 4. We separate two diagnostics: condition-number geometric complexity, which measures curvature reacha-bility, and direction residual, which measures how much of a proposed update is explained by a metric family. Their four quadrants distinguish geometric preconditioning from memory, projection, noise, target modification, and discretization effects. 5. We formulate optimal optimizer design as a constrained Pareto problem over module budgets. We also define trajectory-level residual complexity, which asks whether an entire trace admits a coherent geometric shadow with bounded metric variation. Expression-class inclusions imply oracle inequalities only when the performance functional and feasible budgets are shared. 6. We report diagnostic prototypes that illustrate the language: a full-metric probe for deterministic quadratics, a Krylov-subspace geometric variant, a residual-selected quasi-Newton hybrid, and a Muon-style engineering candidate. These prototypes support the framework as a research language; they leave practical optimizer competitiveness to a separate empirical study. 

Scope. This is a theory and benchmark-language paper. The proved results concern direction expressivity, residual diagnostics, and class/budget distinctions. The experiments are diagnostic and small scale: they show how the calculus can attribute optimizer behavior in controlled settings. Establishing a new optimizer as broadly competitive on modern vision or language benchmarks would require a separate empirical paper with stronger baselines, tuned schedules, wall-clock accounting, and large compute budgets. 22 Related Work 

Geometry in optimization. Riemannian optimization supplies the coordinate-free language of gradients, metrics, retractions, and Hessians (Absil et al., 2008; Boumal, 2023). Natural gradient methods use Fisher geometry (Amari, 1998), mirror descent uses Bregman geometry (Beck & Teboulle, 2003; Raskutti & Mukherjee, 2015), and classical numerical optimization studies conditioning, preconditioning, line search, trust regions, and quasi-Newton updates (Nocedal & Wright, 2006; Bottou et al., 2018). Our paper uses this geometric viewpoint at the optimizer-language level: the geometric module is the positive map from covectors to descent vectors. 

Adaptive preconditioners and structured metrics. AdaGrad, Adam, and AdamW use coordinate-wise adaptive scaling and moment estimation (Duchi et al., 2011; Kingma & Ba, 2015; Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019). K-FAC and Shampoo use structured matrix or tensor preconditioners (Martens & Grosse, 2015; Gupta et al., 2018), while Adafactor and SM3 reduce memory through factored or compressed statistics (Shazeer & Stern, 2018; Anil et al., 2019). SOAP combines Shampoo-style preconditioning with Adam-like second-moment tracking in the preconditioner’s eigenbasis (Vyas et al., 2024), making it especially close to the geometry-plus-statistics split used here. These methods naturally fit our calculus as combinations of a restricted geometric family with information, memory, and control modules. The restricted direction residual introduced below is meant to diagnose how much of an update is explainable by the chosen geometric family. 

Momentum, stochasticity, and objective modification. Momentum and acceleration can be studied through discrete stability polynomials, ODE limits, or variational formulations (Polyak, 1964; Nesterov, 1983; Su et al., 2016; Wibisono et al., 2016). Stochastic optimization separates oracle noise from deterministic descent dynamics (Bottou et al., 2018). Modern optimizers such as Lion and Sophia combine learned or designed update rules with signs, momentum, curvature proxies, clipping, and schedules (Chen et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023). In our language, these mechanisms should be recorded explicitly as memory, noise, operator, target, or control modules when they cannot be represented as positive parameter-space metric descent. 

Matrix-geometry engineering. Muon-style optimizers apply Newton–Schulz orthogonalization to mo-mentum matrices, producing updates that are closer to matrix geometry than coordinate-wise diagonal scaling (Jordan, 2024). Recent work studies Muon as a practical pretraining optimizer and as a non-Euclidean gradient method with several variants (Essential AI et al., 2025; Crawshaw et al., 2025). We use this family only as an engineering reference point for a diagnostic prototype. The formal results in this paper do not depend on Muon, and the small-scale experiments below should not be read as comparisons against Muon, SOAP, or other strong matrix optimizers. 

Dynamic geometric optimization. Optimization geometrodynamics studies optimization as a coupled evolution of parameter trajectory, transported distribution, and time-varying metric. Its full positive-definite benchmark identifies invariant obstructions and affine-invariant metric costs (Li, 2026a). Restricted dynamic geometric complexity then asks what condition-number targets are reachable inside diagonal, block, Kronecker, low-rank, or proxy metric families (Li, 2026b). The present paper is the optimizer-level companion to these two papers: it asks which part of an algorithmic update is geometric, which part is a structured nongeometric mechanism, and how these parts should be budgeted when designing optimizers. The preceding papers provide background terminology and motivation; the formal calculus and residual results below are stated independently for the optimizer-level setting. 

# 3 The Optimizer Calculus 

3.1 Reachability is relative 

Let M be a finite-dimensional smooth parameter manifold and f : M → R an objective. In Euclidean sections we write M = Rd and g = ∇f (θ). A gradient method is never reachable in isolation: it depends on the information oracle, the computation and memory budget, the state variables it is allowed to carry, and the rules it must obey. 3Definition 1 (Reachable optimizer class) . Let O be an oracle class, B a budget class, S a state class, and R

an admissible rule class. The reachable optimizer class 

A(O, B, S, R)

is the set of update laws whose queried information, stored state, internal randomness, target transformations, and parameter updates are generated under these constraints. The four arguments in Definition 1 are part of the problem statement. For example, exact gradients, stochastic gradients, Hessian-vector products, and function values define different oracle classes. A method that is reachable with d extra gradient probes per step may be unreachable under a one-gradient-per-step budget. The definition is semantic rather than syntactic. Two implementations belong to the same reachable class when their allowed queries, state transitions, randomness, target transformations, and parameter updates satisfy the same declared constraints, even if their code is organized differently. Claims about inclusion, optimality, or residual attribution are therefore meaningful only after these constraints and the visible covector have been fixed. 

3.2 Geometry as positive cometric 

At a point θ ∈ M , a Riemannian metric maps tangent vectors to covectors. Its inverse, or cometric, maps covectors to tangent vectors. The geometric module in this paper is a positive cometric family 

PF (θ) ⊂ { Pθ : T ∗ 

> θ

M → Tθ M : Pθ ≻ 0}.

For a covector αθ = d fθ , the geometric descent direction is 

ugeo (θ) = −Pθ αθ .

In Euclidean coordinates, Pθ is a symmetric positive-definite preconditioner and ugeo = −Pθ ∇f (θ).Typical families include full SPD matrices, diagonal matrices, fixed block-diagonal matrices, Kronecker-factored matrices, low-rank corrections, Fisher or Gauss–Newton proxy families, and learned or sketched curvature families. A geometric module therefore consists of 

G = ( F, P 0, Γ) ,

where F is the family, P0 the initial cometric, and Γ an update rule or flow for the cometric. 

3.3 Seven nongeometric modules 

The remaining mechanisms are split into seven modules: Nongeometry = Information + Memory + Control + Operator + Noise + Target + Discretization .

Information. Gradient estimates, mini-batches, curvature proxies, Hessian-vector probes, matrix sketches, bias corrections, and any other rule that determines which covector or curvature data are visible. 

Memory. Momentum, Nesterov lookahead, secant pairs, historical gradient subspaces, restart variables, and other state that carries past information into the current update. 

Control. Learning rates, damping, trust regions, line search, accept–reject rules, schedules, and metric-update speeds. 

Operator. Projection, proximal maps, clipping, normalization, decoupled weight decay, parameter repair, and nonsmooth transformations of candidate updates. 

Noise. Mini-batch sampling noise when modeled explicitly, Langevin perturbations, dropout-induced optimization noise, and escape perturbations. 4Target. Regularized, smoothed, penalized, barrier, homotopy, curriculum, or surrogate objectives that differ from the original f .

Discretization. 

Euler or implicit steps, splitting schemes, finite precision, approximate matrix roots, and implementation-level approximations to a continuous model. This finer split prevents the residual from becoming a shapeless container. For instance, momentum is a memory mechanism under the parameter-space metric convention used here, while a target homotopy belongs to the target module and must be reported as a problem transformation. 

3.4 Continuous and discrete composition 

A continuous-time model can be written as 

˙θt = −Ptdft(θt) + Rt, ˙zt = Z(zt, θ t, f, Ot, ξ t), (1) where ft is the target-module objective, Pt ∈ P F is the geometric module, Rt collects direct nongeometric ve-locity contributions, and zt stores nongeometric state. The metric update can itself be driven by nongeometric state: ˙Pt = Γ( Pt, θ t, z t, f t, Ot).

In discrete time, a broad one-step template is 

θk+1 = Ok(θk − ηkPk̂g k + rk) , (2) where ̂ g k comes from the information module, Pk from geometry, ηk from control, rk from mem-ory/noise/discretization residuals, and Ok from the operator module. The target module determines whether ̂

g k estimates ∇f (θk) or a transformed objective ∇fk(θk).

3.5 Canonical audit order 

The decomposition of a real optimizer is not unique. We use the following lexicographic audit order: 1. Fix the target fk that the algorithm is actually using. 2. Fix the visible covector ̂g k delivered by the information module. 3. Within the declared family F, choose Pk to best explain the observed direction by positive geometry. 4. Attribute global scale, damping, and accept–reject choices to control. 5. Attribute the remaining residual to memory, operator, noise, target distortion, or discretization according to its source. This audit order is a convention, yet it is mathematically useful because it forces the geometric claim to be tested before residual mechanisms are used to explain the update. 

# 4 Direction Expressivity 

This section studies a single point in Euclidean space. The goal is to identify which directions can be explained by a positive parameter-space geometry and which directions require nongeometric modules. 

Proposition 1 (Pointwise full-SPD geometricization) . Let g ∈ Rd be nonzero and let u ∈ Rd. There exists 

P ∈ Sd 

> ++

such that 

u = −P g 

if and only if 

g⊤u < 0.

5Proposition 1 says that full positive-definite geometry expresses exactly strict descent directions away from critical points. It also identifies the boundary. If g⊤u ≥ 0, the direction is neutral or ascending to first order and cannot be a pure positive-metric gradient descent direction. If g = 0 and u̸ = 0 , the motion cannot be produced by any positive parameter-space cometric applied to dfθ . This is an existential expressivity statement. The constructed matrix may be ill-conditioned and expensive to estimate or store, so the proposition does not by itself imply a practical full-matrix method. 

Corollary 1 (Critical-point boundary) . If dfθ = 0 , then −Pθ dfθ = 0 for every positive cometric Pθ . Any nonzero motion at an exact critical point must come from a nongeometric module, a target transformation, an extended state-space geometry, or a nonpositive/non-gradient mechanism. 

4.1 Restricted direction residual 

Full SPD geometry is an expression envelope. Implementable optimizers use restricted families. Let h be a reference metric on Tθ M and let ∥·∥ h be its norm. For a tangent vector u and covector α, define the restricted direction residual 

ρF,h (u; α) = inf    

> P∈P F(θ)

∥u + P α ∥h . (3) When a scalar step size is separated into the control module, a scaled version is 

ρscale  

> F,h

(u; α) = inf    

> η> 0, P ∈P F(θ)

∥u + ηP α ∥h . (4) The residual is zero when the family can approximate the direction arbitrarily well. Exact expression requires the infimum to be attained. This distinction matters for open cones such as pi > 0 in diagonal families. For diagnostics that should penalize nearly singular explanations, one should replace the open family by a bounded family such as 

P[λ,L ] 

> F

(θ) = {P ∈ P F (θ) : λI ⪯ P ⪯ LI }, 0 < λ ≤ L < ∞.

The unbounded residual in equation (3) is useful for expression analysis, while a bounded residual is more appropriate for engineering comparisons with explicit conditioning, storage, or stability budgets. For bounded diagonal geometry, this engineering residual has the closed-form coordinate projection in Proposition 7. If PF is a cone closed under positive scaling, the extra minimization over η in equation (4) is redundant. The scaled residual is included for normalized families, bounded families, or families whose parameterization fixes a metric scale. For u̸ = 0 , an empirical geometric explanation rate is 

GER F,h (u; α) = 1 − ρF,h (u; α)

∥u∥h

. (5) The ratio can be negative if the best geometric approximation is worse than the zero explanation. A clipped version can be used as an engineering score, while the unclipped version is cleaner for analysis. When the infimum is not attained, GER should be reported as an approximation rate, not as an exact geometric representation certificate. 

4.2 Diagonal geometry 

Consider Euclidean coordinates, h = I, and the diagonal family 

Pdiag = {diag( p1, . . . , p d) : pi > 0}.

Proposition 2 (Diagonal exact expressivity and residual) . Let g, u ∈ Rd. There exists P ∈ P diag such that 

u = −P g if and only if, for every coordinate i,

gi = 0 ⇒ ui = 0 , gi̸ = 0 ⇒ uigi < 0.

6Moreover, 

ρdiag ,I(u; g)2 = ∑

> i:gi=0

u2 

> i

+ ∑ 

> i:gi̸=0 , u igi>0

u2 

> i

.

If gi̸ = 0 and ui = 0 for some coordinate, the infimum in that coordinate is zero but is not attained by any strictly positive pi.

This proposition shows that diagonal geometry is coordinate-dependent. A rotation of the parameterization can change which directions satisfy the coordinate-wise sign condition. 

4.3 Block geometry 

Let {B1, . . . , B m} be a partition of coordinates and let 

Pblock = {blockdiag( PB1 , . . . , P Bm ) : PBj ≻ 0}.

Write gBj and uBj for block restrictions. 

Proposition 3 (Block exact expressivity) . There exists P ∈ P block such that u = −P g if and only if, for every block Bj ,

gBj = 0 ⇒ uBj = 0 , gBj̸ = 0 ⇒ g⊤ 

> Bj

uBj < 0.

The block condition interpolates between the coordinate-wise diagonal condition and the global full-SPD condition. It is also a useful audit rule: if a transformer layer, convolutional block, or parameter group violates the block descent condition, the update contains a nongeometric contribution at that block scale. 

4.4 Nongeometric necessities 

Propositions 1 to 3 and Corollary 1 imply that several common optimizer behaviors should remain outside the parameter-space positive geometry module: 

• Momentum can create short-time neutral or ascending steps. These steps are memory contributions relative to the current objective and metric. 

• Noise can move an iterate away from an exact critical point. Such motion is not generated by −P df at that point. 

• Projection and proximal maps can replace an infeasible descent step by a boundary motion or a fixed point satisfying a normal-cone condition. 

• Target transformations can make −P dfk a descent direction for fk while it has a large residual relative to the original f .Keeping these mechanisms explicit is necessary for a useful optimizer language, because their benefits and risks follow different budget and stability laws. 

# 5 Restricted Diagnostics 

Restricted dynamic geometric complexity and restricted direction residuals measure different things. Both are needed to audit optimizer mechanisms. 

5.1 Curvature reachability 

For a strongly convex quadratic 

f (θ) = 12 θ⊤Hθ − b⊤θ, H ≻ 0,

7a metric or cometric changes the spectrum that governs local linear convergence. Prior restricted-complexity analysis studies quantities schematically of the form 

DK, F (S0; H) = inf Len AI (St) subject to St ∈ F , κ (S1/2 

> T

HS 1/2 

> T

) ≤ K, 

with the precise expression depending on whether the family is represented by metrics, cometrics, quotient coordinates, or proxy variables. This quantity asks how much geometric deformation is required to reach a target condition-number class. 

5.2 Direction explainability 

The residual ρF,h (u; α) in equation (3) asks a different question: given an observed algorithmic direction u

and a visible covector α, how much of u is explained by positive geometry inside F? It can be computed even when the Hessian is unavailable. It is therefore suitable for auditing real training traces, where one usually has gradients and parameter updates but not full curvature. 

5.3 Four quadrants 

The pair 

DF = ( DK, F , ρ F,h )

has four qualitatively different regimes:           

> Curvature Direction residual Interpretation low low Geometry improves conditioning and explains the update. low high The family can handle curvature, while the update uses memory, noise, operator, or target mechanisms. high low The current direction is explainable, while the family may remain weak for long-term curvature conditioning. high high The family struggles both as a curvature model and as a direction explanation.

This table is a diagnostic device. A low direction residual is not a convergence certificate; it only says that the direction is geometrically explainable. A high residual is not a defect by itself; it may reveal a useful memory, exploration, projection, or target mechanism. 

5.4 Target-module restrictions 

The target module must be controlled. If an optimizer may replace f by an arbitrary easier objective, optimizer comparison loses meaning. We therefore separate four admissible target transformations: 

Endpoint-preserving homotopy. 

A path fλ with a declared endpoint f1 = f and a schedule for returning to the original objective. 

Critical-set controlled transformation. 

A transformation whose critical points are related to those of f by a stated inclusion, correspondence, or error bound. 

Bounded regularization. 

A regularizer or penalty with a reported magnitude and transfer effect on the original objective. 

Certified surrogate. 

A surrogate objective accompanied by a descent, transfer, or approximation certificate for f .Residuals should specify whether they are computed relative to the active target fk or the original objective 

f .85.5 Expression inclusion and budget inclusion 

Let Aall be a broad reachable class, let Afullgeo be the class whose directions are pure full-SPD geometry relative to the declared target and information module, and let AFgeo be the analogous class restricted to a family F. If 

AFgeo ⊆ Afullgeo ⊆ Aall 

and all classes are evaluated by the same performance functional J, then 

J⋆ 

> all

≤ J⋆ 

> fullgeo

≤ J⋆

> Fgeo

, J⋆ 

> C

= inf  

> A∈C

J(A).

This is an expression-class statement. It does not imply that a full-SPD method is preferable under engineering constraints. If full SPD matrices are too expensive to estimate, store, communicate, or invert, the budget-feasible class can exclude them. Optimizer design therefore needs both expression inclusions and budget-feasible inclusions. 

# 6 The Optimal Optimizer Problem 

The calculus turns optimizer design into a constrained control problem over modules. The important object is not a total ordering of all optimizers, but a Pareto frontier under explicit budgets and tasks. 

6.1 Module budgets 

For an optimizer A run for N steps, define a module-budget vector 

B(A) = ( Bgeo , B info , B mem , B ctrl , B op , B noise , B target , B disc ).

The components can count different resources: affine-invariant metric length, number of gradient calls, Hessian-vector products, sketch dimension, optimizer state size, synchronization cost, line-search evaluations, projection cost, random samples, target distortion, or numerical approximation error. They need not be commensurate. For example, a geometric deformation cost can be 

Bgeo = 

> N−1

∑

> k=0

dAI (Pk, P k+1 ),

when the family carries an affine-invariant SPD geometry. An information budget can count oracle calls: 

Binfo = # {gradient calls } + chvp #{Hessian-vector products } + ceval #{function evaluations }.

For large-scale training, memory and communication budgets may dominate the choice of admissible geometry. 

6.2 Pareto design problem 

Let Π be a task distribution over objectives, data, initializations, and stopping criteria. Let J(A; Π) be a performance functional such as expected final loss, time-to-accuracy, validation loss, wall-clock time, or a multi-objective score. Given a budget set B, the constrained design problem is 

min  

> A∈ A(O,B,S,R)

J(A; Π) subject to B(A) ∈ B. (6) When the budget components are not scalarized, the output is a Pareto set: an optimizer is dominated only if another optimizer improves performance without exceeding any declared budget component. 96.3 Trajectory-level residual complexity 

Pointwise residuals explain one update direction. To audit an optimizer trace, the geometric explanations should also be coherent over time. Let 

TN = {(θk, α k, u k, h k)}N −1 

> k=0

, θk+1 = θk + uk,

where αk is the declared visible covector, such as a gradient or mini-batch gradient. An explanatory path for a family F is a sequence 

E = {(ηk, P k)}N −1 

> k=0

, ηk > 0, Pk ∈ P F (θk).

It induces a geometric shadow increment and residual 

vk(E) = −ηkPkαk, rk(E) = uk − vk(E) = uk + ηkPkαk.

For 1 ≤ p, q < ∞, define 

Rp(E; TN ) = 

(N −1∑

> k=0

∥rk(E)∥phk

)1/p 

, Vq (E) = 

(N −2∑

> k=0

dF (Pk+1 , P k)q

)1/q 

,

with the usual maximum-norm variants for p = ∞ or q = ∞. Here dF is the declared geometry distance, for example affine-invariant SPD distance, log-diagonal distance, or a distance in proxy variables. The trajectory-level residual complexity is 

TRC Bgeo  

> p,q

(TN ; F) = inf   

> E:Vq(E)≤Bgeo

Rp(E; TN ). (7) Thus the trace must be explained not only by admissible pointwise preconditioners, but by an admissible path of preconditioners with bounded geometric variation. This prevents a rich family from explaining every step through unrelated or nearly singular matrices. In this paper we use equation (7) as a finite-trace diagnostic after the family, distance, bounds, and variation budget have been declared. General compactness, attainment, and statistical consistency questions for broad metric families are left as part of the longer theory of restricted geometric traces; the diagnostic cases below use finite-dimensional bounded families with explicit optimization problems. Let 

Up(TN ) = 

(N −1∑

> k=0

∥uk∥phk

)1/p 

.

When Up(TN ) > 0, the trajectory geometric explanation rate is 

TGER Bgeo  

> p,q

(TN ; F) = 1 − TRC Bgeo  

> p,q

(TN ; F)

Up(TN ) .

The raw version TRC raw  

> p

is obtained by removing the variation constraint. The coherence gap 

CG Bgeo  

> p,q

(TN ; F) = TRC Bgeo  

> p,q

(TN ; F) − TRC raw  

> p

(TN ; F)

measures the extra residual paid to make the explanation temporally coherent. A low raw residual but high coherence gap indicates pointwise geometry that requires rapidly changing metrics; a high raw residual with low coherence gap indicates a persistent nongeometric mechanism relative to the chosen family. 

Proposition 4 (Trajectory shadowing) . In Euclidean space with a fixed norm, let E be any explanatory path and let ¯θ0 = θ0, ¯θk+1 = ¯θk + vk(E). Then, for 1 ≤ p < ∞ and every m ≤ N ,

∥∥θm − ¯θm

∥∥ ≤

> m−1

∑

> k=0

∥rk(E)∥ ≤ m1−1/p Rp(E; TN ).

For p = ∞, the last term is replaced by mR ∞(E; TN ).

10 Proposition 5 (Smooth descent with residual budget) . Let f be L-smooth in Euclidean norm. Suppose 

gk = ∇f (θk) and 

uk = −Qkgk + rk, Qk = ηkPk ⪰ 0,

with 

g⊤ 

> k

Qkgk ≥ mk ∥gk∥2 , ∥Qkgk∥ ≤ Mk ∥gk∥ .

Then 

f (θk+1 ) ≤ f (θk) − mk ∥gk∥2 + ∥gk∥ ∥ rk∥ + L

2 (Mk ∥gk∥ + ∥rk∥)2 .

For bounded diagonal geometry, equation (7) has a computable convex specialization. With Pk =diag (pk, 1, . . . , p k,d ), λ ≤ pk,i ≤ Λ, fixed positive ηk, and quadratic variation in the diagonal weights, one solves 

min 

> λ≤pk,i ≤Λ

∑

> k,i

(uk,i + ηkpk,i gk,i )2 + β ∑

> k,i

(pk+1 ,i − pk,i )2.

This turns trajectory residual complexity into a practical diagnostic: report raw residual, coherent residual, coherence gap, and geometry variation before attributing the unexplained part to memory, operator, noise, target, or discretization modules. 

6.4 Canonical module search 

The calculus suggests a structured search process: 1. Choose the target family allowed for the task. 2. Select the cheapest geometry family whose curvature complexity and direction residual are acceptable. 3. Allocate information budget to estimate the chosen geometry. 4. Add memory and control only where residuals or stability diagnostics show a need. 5. Add operator, noise, and target modules when constraints, exploration, or problem deformation are part of the task specification. 6. Track discretization error separately from the mathematical update. This search process is a research program. It does not assume that a richer geometry always wins, because information, memory, communication, and implementation budgets can make a restricted family preferable. 

6.5 A minimal optimality theorem 

The following statement records the only optimizer-ordering principle used in this paper. 

Proposition 6 (Budgeted class monotonicity) . Let C1 ⊆ C 2 be two optimizer classes and let J be the same performance functional on both. If the same budget-feasible set is imposed on both classes, then 

inf 

> A∈C 2

J(A) ≤ inf 

> A∈C 1

J(A).

If the two classes have different feasible budget sets, the inequality need not compare the engineering optima. 

This elementary proposition is included to prevent a common overextension: full-SPD geometry is an expression superset of restricted geometry, while the budget-feasible optimizer frontier may favor a cheaper family. 

# 7 Diagnostic Prototypes 

The prototypes in this section are included to show how the calculus guides optimizer construction and auditing. They are not presented as final large-scale optimizers. 11 Table 1: Deterministic quadratic diagnostic benchmark. “Calls” denotes mean gradient calls. Results are averaged over the repository benchmark instances described in section B. The rows compare diagnostic behavior under different information patterns; they are not a matched wall-clock or oracle-budget ranking. Optimizer Calls Mean final gap Converged Default check: d = 32 , two instances per problem family 

GNG-FullMetricProbe v2 33 1.26 × 10 −12 6 / 6 

GNG-KrylovMetric 33 1.70 0 / 6 FIFO-LBFGS 151 1.88 0 / 6 RSDLR-BFGS-Hybrid 156.67 7.29 0 / 6 Adam-tuned 161 75 .83 0 / 6 GD-oracle 161 572 .99 0 / 6 HeavyBall-oracle 161 4.14 × 10 7 0 / 6 Dimension check: d = 64 , one instance per problem family 

GNG-FullMetricProbe v2 65 0.0 3 / 3 

GNG-KrylovMetric 65 2.68 0 / 3 FIFO-LBFGS 186.67 1.71 0 / 3 RSDLR-BFGS-Hybrid 221 15 .01 0 / 3 Adam-tuned 221 209 .77 0 / 3 GD-oracle 221 1.26 × 10 3 0 / 3 HeavyBall-oracle 208.67 2.54 × 10 9 1 / 3 

7.1 Full-metric probe on deterministic quadratics 

Consider deterministic strongly convex quadratics 

f (x) = 12 x⊤Hx − b⊤x, H ≻ 0.

The prototype GNG-FullMetricProbe uses one gradient at the current point and d coordinate gradient probes: 

∇f (x + ei) − ∇ f (x) = He i.

It reconstructs H and takes the full metric step 

x+ = x − H−1∇f (x).

The module decomposition is: Module Choice Geometry full SPD inverse metric H−1

Information one initial gradient plus d coordinate probes Memory none Control one full metric step Operator/noise/target none, original objective Discretization explicit finite-dimensional solve This method is appropriate only for the diagnostic setting where full coordinate gradient probes are affordable and the objective is exactly quadratic. It illustrates the expression envelope: enough information buys the full geometry and eliminates the quadratic in one step. 

7.2 Krylov and residual-selected variants 

GNG-KrylovMetric replaces the full coordinate probe by sequential directional probes. Each step obtains 

Hp = ∇f (x + p) − ∇ f (x)

12 and takes an exact quadratic line-search step along a conjugate direction. In exact arithmetic this is closely related to conjugate gradient; in the calculus it is a growing subspace geometry with one directional probe per iteration. The finite-precision benchmark in table 1 shows that this version did not match the full probe on the current high-condition-number instances, despite using the same order of gradient calls. RSDLR-BFGS-Hybrid uses a bounded diagonal inverse metric and low-rank secant memory selected partly by a diagonal residual score. It did not outperform FIFO-LBFGS in the diagnostic benchmark. This failure is informative: directions with large diagonal residual are not automatically the most useful secant memories for future quasi-Newton progress. A stronger low-budget method should combine residual, recency, curvature diversity, and positive-definite stability. The Krylov row should also be read narrowly. It is a prototype subspace metric with finite-precision directional probes and implementation choices, not a replacement claim for standard conjugate gradient on exact SPD quadratics. 

7.3 A Muon-style engineering candidate 

The prototype GNGMuon combines matrix orthogonalized momentum for two-dimensional parameter tensors with an AdamW path for vector and scalar parameters. Its module decomposition is: Module Choice Geometry matrix-shaped candidate update after orthogonalization Information mini-batch gradient Memory matrix momentum; AdamW moments for scalar/vector parameters Control learning rate, matrix scale, weight decay, Newton–Schulz steps Operator Newton–Schulz polar-factor approximation Noise mini-batch stochasticity Target supervised cross-entropy Discretization PyTorch finite-step implementation Under the strict convention of section 3, the Newton–Schulz polar factor of a momentum buffer is not automatically an SPD cometric applied to the current visible gradient. The prototype is therefore best viewed as a matrix-operator and memory-heavy engineering candidate whose update can be audited by the calculus, rather than as a proof that Muon-style steps are pure positive geometry. On a small MNIST subset with 1024 training examples, 512 test examples, one epoch, batch size 128 , and three seeds, the best small-grid AdamW setting observed in the repository obtained mean accuracy about 

72 .6% , while GNGMuon obtained about 77 .0% . This is early engineering evidence only. It does not compare against Muon, Lion, Sophia, Shampoo/SOAP, or tuned task-specific schedules, and it does not include large-scale wall-clock or memory accounting. 

7.4 Trace-level residual audit 

To check that the calculus can audit ordinary training traces, we also record the first eight MNIST-subset training updates for AdamW, SGD/Nesterov, and GNGMuon . For each step we compute the actual parameter update uk = θk+1 − θk and the visible raw gradient gk, then report the open diagonal GER and the bounded diagonal GER with pi ∈ [10 −6, 1] from Proposition 7. This is an audit diagnostic, not a performance comparison.         

> Optimizer Mean open diagonal GER Mean bounded diagonal GER AdamW 0.387 0.153
> SGD/Nesterov 0.732 0.720
> GNGMuon 0.460 0.209

The gap between open and bounded GER shows why the bounded diagnostic matters: an update may look partly diagonal-geometric only through scales outside the declared engineering range. The trace also 13 illustrates that optimizers can be compared by mechanism attribution even when their accuracy numbers are too small-scale to support optimizer-performance claims. We also compute a trajectory-level bounded-diagonal diagnostic on the same eight-step traces. The raw bounded TGER uses the ℓ2 trace residual with an independently chosen bounded diagonal scale at each step. The coherent bounded TGER uses one shared bounded diagonal scale over all eight steps, which is the 

Bgeo = 0 specialization of equation (7). The normalized coherence gap is (TRC coherent − TRC raw )/U 2.            

> Optimizer Raw bounded TGER Coherent bounded TGER Norm. coherence gap AdamW 0.150 0.120 0.030
> SGD/Nesterov 0.686 0.423 0.263
> GNGMuon 0.203 0.120 0.084

The coherent diagnostic asks whether the same restricted geometry can shadow the whole short trace. On this run, bounded pointwise diagonal explanations for SGD/Nesterov are strong, but their no-variation coherent shadow pays a larger gap; AdamW and GNGMuon have lower raw bounded TGER and smaller absolute coherence gaps. These numbers are mechanism audits for a short trace, not claims about optimizer quality. 

7.5 What the prototypes show 

The prototypes support three modest conclusions: 1. When full curvature information is available and cheap, the geometric module can dominate performance on quadratic problems. 2. When information is limited, the choice of subspace geometry and memory selection rule matters as much as the nominal geometry family. 3. Engineering candidates need nongeometric controls, operator choices, and implementation budgets before they can be evaluated as practical optimizers. These conclusions are aligned with the calculus: optimizer quality is a budgeted combination of geometry and nongeometry. 

# 8 Discussion and Limitations 

What is geometric? The paper uses a narrow and auditable convention: geometry means a positive parameter-space cometric applied to the visible covector. Momentum may be geometric in an enlarged phase space, and proximal methods may be geometric under a different variational structure. Those are valuable extensions. The present convention keeps the parameter update audit simple and makes the boundary statements in section 4 precise. 

Residuals are diagnostics. A large residual does not mean an optimizer is poor. It means the chosen metric family does not explain the direction. The residual may be useful memory, exploration, projection, target deformation, or discretization. Residuals become actionable only when paired with module budgets and stability or transfer certificates. 

Coordinate dependence. Diagonal and block residuals depend on the parameterization. This is a feature for auditing coordinate-based optimizers such as Adam-like methods, and a limitation for coordinate-free claims. A coordinate-invariant diagnostic requires a declared reference metric h and a family defined intrinsically on the manifold. 

Target transformations. Continuation, smoothing, regularization, and surrogates are powerful, yet they change the optimization problem unless transfer conditions are stated. The calculus therefore reports target transformations separately from metric geometry. This separation is important when comparing algorithms whose training losses, regularizers, augmentations, or curricula differ. 14 Empirical limits. The diagnostic prototypes are intentionally small. The deterministic quadratic bench-mark checks the full-geometry expression story under a high information budget. The MNIST subset check shows that a geometry-aware engineering candidate can be promising. Neither experiment resolves broad performance against current strong optimizers. That would require tuned baselines such as AdamW, SGD/Nesterov, Lion, Sophia, Muon, and Shampoo/SOAP across modern vision and language workloads, with matched training budgets, seeds, throughput, memory, and hyperparameter search. 

Research directions. The most immediate theoretical directions are: 1. closed-form residuals for bounded diagonal, block, Kronecker, and low-rank families; 2. separation examples proving all four quadrants of curvature complexity and direction residual; 3. Lyapunov or regret bounds with explicit nongeometric residual budgets; 4. empirical GER traces for AdamW, Muon, Shampoo, and related optimizers; 5. module-level Pareto frontiers on controlled quadratics, convex finite sums, and small neural networks. 

# 9 Reproducibility Statement 

The formal statements in sections 4 to 6 are proved in section A. The diagnostic quadratic benchmark is implemented in the repository under experiments/toy/gng_optimizer_benchmark.py . The Muon-style prototype is implemented under experiments/optimizers/gng_muon.py , with a small training entry under experiments/mnist/train_gng_muon.py . The trace residual audit is implemented under 

experiments/mnist/trace_residual_diagnostic.py . The reported prototype numbers should be treated as diagnostic observations from these scripts, not as a definitive benchmark suite. The MNIST script records the training configuration and fixes Python, NumPy, PyTorch, and data-loader seeds, but the current repository results do not record hardware, CUDA/cuDNN versions, or a complete hyperparameter-search log. 

# 10 Ethics Statement 

This paper studies optimization language, theory, and small diagnostic experiments. It does not introduce a deployed system or a dataset involving human subjects. The main ethical risk is overclaiming optimizer performance from insufficient evidence. We therefore state the scope of the empirical results explicitly and reserve broad performance claims for future work with large-scale, fairly tuned comparisons. 

# References 

P.-A. Absil, Robert Mahony, and Rodolphe Sepulchre. Optimization Algorithms on Matrix Manifolds .Princeton University Press, 2008. Shun-ichi Amari. Natural gradient works efficiently in learning. Neural Computation , 10(2):251–276, 1998. doi: 10.1162/089976698300017746. Rohan Anil, Vineet Gupta, Tomer Koren, and Yoram Singer. Memory efficient adaptive optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 32, 2019. URL https://proceedings. neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/hash/8f1fa0193ca2b5d2fa0695827d8270e9-Abstract.html .Amir Beck and Marc Teboulle. Mirror descent and nonlinear projected subgradient methods for convex optimization. Operations Research Letters , 31(3):167–175, 2003. doi: 10.1016/S0167-6377(02)00231-6. Léon Bottou, Frank E. Curtis, and Jorge Nocedal. Optimization methods for large-scale machine learning. 

SIAM Review , 60(2):223–311, 2018. doi: 10.1137/16M1080173. Nicolas Boumal. An Introduction to Optimization on Smooth Manifolds . Cambridge University Press, 2023. doi: 10.1017/9781009166164. 15 Xiangning Chen, Chen Liang, Da Huang, Esteban Real, Kaiyuan Wang, Yao Liu, Hieu Pham, Xuanyi Dong, Thang Luong, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Yifeng Lu, and Quoc V. Le. Symbolic discovery of optimization algorithms, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.06675 .Michael Crawshaw, Chirag Modi, Mingrui Liu, and Robert M. Gower. An exploration of non-euclidean gradient descent: Muon and its many variants, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.09827 .John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning and stochastic optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 12:2121–2159, 2011. URL https://jmlr.org/ papers/v12/duchi11a.html .Essential AI, Ishaan Shah, Anthony M. Polloreno, Karl Stratos, Philip Monk, Adarsh Chaluvaraju, Andrew Hojel, Andrew Ma, Anil Thomas, Ashish Tanwer, Darsh J. Shah, Khoi Nguyen, Kurt Smith, Michael Callahan, Michael Pust, Mohit Parmar, Peter Rushton, Platon Mazarakis, Ritvik Kapila, Saurabh Srivastava, Somanshu Singla, Tim Romanski, Yash Vanjani, and Ashish Vaswani. Practical efficiency of muon for pretraining, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.02222 .Vineet Gupta, Tomer Koren, and Yoram Singer. Shampoo: Preconditioned stochastic tensor optimization. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 1842–1850. PMLR, 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/ gupta18a.html .Keller Jordan. Muon: An optimizer for hidden layers in neural networks. https://kellerjordan.github. io/posts/muon/ , 2024. Blog post. Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980 . arXiv:1412.6980. Zavier Li. Optimization geometrodynamics: A framework for dynamic geometric optimization, 2026a. arXiv preprint. Zavier Li. Restricted Dynamic Geometric Complexity: Certificates for Structured Preconditioning, 2026b. arXiv preprint. Hong Liu, Zhiyuan Li, David Hall, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. Sophia: A scalable stochastic second-order optimizer for language model pre-training, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14342 .Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.05101 . arXiv:1711.05101. James Martens and Roger Grosse. Optimizing neural networks with kronecker-factored approximate curvature. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 2408–2417. PMLR, 2015. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/ martens15.html .Yurii E. Nesterov. A method for solving the convex programming problem with convergence rate o(1 /k 2).

Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR , 269(3):543–547, 1983. Jorge Nocedal and Stephen J. Wright. Numerical Optimization . Springer, 2 edition, 2006. doi: 10.1007/ 978-0-387-40065-5. Boris T. Polyak. Some methods of speeding up the convergence of iteration methods. USSR Computational Mathematics and Mathematical Physics , 4(5):1–17, 1964. doi: 10.1016/0041-5553(64)90137-5. Garvesh Raskutti and Sayan Mukherjee. The information geometry of mirror descent. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 61(3):1451–1457, 2015. doi: 10.1109/TIT.2015.2391243. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/1310.7780 .16 Noam Shazeer and Mitchell Stern. Adafactor: Adaptive learning rates with sublinear memory cost. In 

Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 4596–4604. PMLR, 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/ shazeer18a.html .Weijie Su, Stephen Boyd, and Emmanuel J. Candès. A differential equation for modeling nesterov’s accelerated gradient method: Theory and insights. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 17(153):1–43, 2016. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.01243 .Nikhil Vyas, Depen Morwani, Rosie Zhao, Mujin Kwun, Itai Shapira, David Brandfonbrener, Lucas Janson, and Sham Kakade. Soap: Improving and stabilizing shampoo using adam, 2024. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2409.11321 .Andre Wibisono, Ashia C. Wilson, and Michael I. Jordan. A variational perspective on accelerated methods in optimization. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 113(47):E7351–E7358, 2016. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.04245 .

# A Proofs 

A.1 Proof of Proposition 1 

If u = −P g with P ≻ 0 and g̸ = 0 , then 

g⊤u = −g⊤P g < 0.

Conversely, suppose g⊤u < 0 and define b = −u. Then g⊤b > 0. Choose an orthonormal basis with 

e1 = g/ ∥g∥. In this basis write 

b = βe 1 + c, c ⊥ e1, β = e⊤ 

> 1

b = g⊤b

∥g∥ > 0.

For d = 1 , set P = [ β/ ∥g∥]. For d > 1, define 

˜P =

(β/ ∥g∥ c⊤/ ∥g∥

c/ ∥g∥ γI 

)

in the chosen basis. Then 

˜P (∥g∥ e1) = b. 

The Schur complement of the upper-left block is 

γI − cc ⊤

∥g∥ β .

Choosing γ > ∥c∥2 /(∥g∥ β) makes this complement positive, so ˜P ≻ 0. Transforming back to the original coordinates gives an SPD matrix P with P g = b = −u, hence u = −P g .

A.2 Proof of Corollary 1 

If dfθ = 0 , linearity gives Pθ dfθ = 0 for every positive cometric Pθ . Thus a pure positive-geometry update is zero. Any nonzero tangent vector at that point must enter through another module or through a different modeling convention. 17 A.3 Proof of Proposition 2 

The equation u = −P g with P = diag( p1, . . . , p d) and pi > 0 is equivalent coordinate-wise to 

ui = −pigi.

If gi = 0 , exact expression requires ui = 0 . If gi̸ = 0 , exact expression requires pi = −ui/g i > 0, equivalently 

uigi < 0.For the residual, the squared Euclidean objective separates: 

inf 

> pi>0

∑

> i

(ui + pigi)2 = ∑

> i

inf 

> pi>0

(ui + pigi)2.

If gi = 0 , the term is u2 

> i

. If gi̸ = 0 and uigi < 0, the positive choice pi = −ui/g i gives zero. If gi̸ = 0 and 

uigi > 0, the unconstrained minimizer is negative, so the infimum over pi > 0 is the boundary value u2 

> i

,approached as pi ↓ 0. If gi̸ = 0 and ui = 0 , the infimum is zero, again approached as pi ↓ 0, but it is not attained by a strictly positive pi. This proves the formula and the attainment statement. 

A.4 Bounded diagonal residual 

Proposition 7 (Bounded diagonal residual) . Fix 0 < λ ≤ L < ∞ and let 

P[λ,L ]diag = {diag( p1, . . . , p d) : λ ≤ pi ≤ L}.

For g, u ∈ Rd and h = I,

ρdiag [λ,L ],I (u; g)2 =

> d

∑

> i=1

(ui + p⋆i gi)2,

where, for gi̸ = 0 ,

p⋆i = min 

{

L, max 

{

λ, − ui

gi

}} 

,

and for gi = 0 any p⋆i ∈ [λ, L ] gives the same term u2 

> i

.Proof. The squared residual separates by coordinate: 

inf 

> λ≤pi≤L

∑

> i

(ui + pigi)2 = ∑

> i

inf 

> λ≤pi≤L

(ui + pigi)2.

If gi = 0 , the coordinate objective is constant and equal to u2 

> i

. If gi̸ = 0 , the unconstrained minimizer of the one-dimensional convex quadratic is −ui/g i. Projecting this minimizer onto the interval [λ, L ] gives p⋆i , and substituting the coordinate minimizers gives the stated formula. 

A.5 Proof of Proposition 3 

For a block-diagonal P , the equation u = −P g separates over blocks: 

uBj = −PBj gBj .

If gBj = 0 , exact expression requires uBj = 0 . If gBj̸ = 0 , Proposition 1 applied inside the block gives existence of PBj ≻ 0 exactly when g⊤ 

> Bj

uBj < 0. Combining the block solutions gives the desired block-diagonal matrix. 18 A.6 Proof of Proposition 4 

By construction, 

θm − ¯θm =

> m−1

∑

> k=0

(uk − vk(E)) = 

> m−1

∑

> k=0

rk(E).

The first inequality follows from the triangle inequality: 

∥∥θm − ¯θm

∥∥ ≤

> m−1

∑

> k=0

∥rk(E)∥ .

For 1 ≤ p < ∞, Holder’s inequality gives 

> m−1

∑

> k=0

∥rk(E)∥ ≤ m1−1/p 

(m−1∑

> k=0

∥rk(E)∥p

)1/p 

≤ m1−1/p Rp(E; TN ).

For p = ∞, the same argument gives 

> m−1

∑

> k=0

∥rk(E)∥ ≤ m max  

> 0≤k<N

∥rk(E)∥ = mR ∞(E; TN ).

A.7 Proof of Proposition 5 

By L-smoothness, 

f (θk+1 ) ≤ f (θk) + g⊤ 

> k

uk + L

2 ∥uk∥2 .

Using uk = −Qkgk + rk,

g⊤ 

> k

uk = −g⊤ 

> k

Qkgk + g⊤ 

> k

rk ≤ − mk ∥gk∥2 + ∥gk∥ ∥ rk∥ .

Also, 

∥uk∥ ≤ ∥ Qkgk∥ + ∥rk∥ ≤ Mk ∥gk∥ + ∥rk∥ .

Substituting these two bounds into the smoothness inequality proves the claim. 

A.8 Proof of Proposition 6 

Let C1 ⊆ C 2 and impose the same feasible budget set on both. The feasible set for C1 is a subset of the feasible set for C2. Taking the infimum of the same functional J over a larger set cannot increase the value. If the feasible budget sets differ, this set-inclusion argument no longer applies. 

# B Diagnostic Prototype Details 

B.1 Quadratic benchmark 

The deterministic quadratic benchmark uses three problem families: 1. rotated strongly convex quadratics; 2. diagonal-plus-low-rank quadratics; 3. block-coupled quadratics. The script records final objective gap, gradient-call count, and convergence under a gradient-norm tolerance. The default repository command is 19 python experiments/toy/gng_optimizer_benchmark.py --output experiments/toy/gng-results 

and the larger diagnostic run used during development was 

python experiments/toy/gng_optimizer_benchmark.py --output experiments/toy/gng-results ‘ --dim 64 --instances 4 --memory 8 --max-iter 220 --grad-tol 1e-8 

The paper reports the later optimized diagnostic checks because they use GNG-FullMetricProbe v2, which removes an unnecessary final gradient validation call and therefore uses d + 1 gradient calls. The benchmark script also runs HeavyBall-oracle ; the row is included in the updated table because it is part of the saved summary. Its poor performance on these high-condition-number instances should not be read as a general statement about heavy-ball methods. The Adam-tuned row reports the selected run from a six-point learning rate sweep in the script; the table’s gradient-call column does not charge the separate tuning sweep as an optimizer budget. 

B.2 Prototype descriptions 

GNG-FullMetricProbe. The method evaluates g0 = ∇f (x0) and then evaluates gradients at x0 + ei

for i = 1 , . . . , d . For a deterministic quadratic, these probes recover the columns of H. The update 

x+ = x0 − H−1g0 is the exact Newton step. The final gradient can be computed internally as g0 + H(x+ − x0),so no final oracle call is needed. 

GNG-KrylovMetric. The method performs sequential directional probes to obtain Hp along search directions. It uses exact quadratic line search and conjugacy-style updates. Its interpretation in this paper is a growing Krylov subspace metric, not a new claim about conjugate-gradient theory. The reported implementation is not presented as a standard CG baseline. 

RSDLR-BFGS-Hybrid. The method combines a bounded diagonal inverse metric with a limited secant memory. It keeps a mixture of recent secant pairs and pairs with high residual under the current diagonal model. In the present benchmark it did not outperform FIFO-LBFGS. 

B.3 MNIST subset diagnostic 

The engineering prototype GNGMuon was checked with the repository training entry on a small MNIST subset: train subset = 1024 , test subset = 512 , epochs = 1 , batch size = 128 .

The comparison used three seeds after a small learning-rate grid. The best AdamW grid point found was 

lr = 0 .003 ; the GNGMuon setting used lr = 0 .03 and matrix scale 1.5. The observed test accuracies were: Seed AdamW GNGMuon 

7 70 .90% 79 .10% 

8 76 .76% 78 .52% 

9 70 .12% 73 .24% 

Mean 72 .59% 76 .95% 

The sample standard deviations across these three seeds are about 3.63 percentage points for AdamW and 3.23 

percentage points for GNGMuon . The script fixes Python, NumPy, and PyTorch seeds and uses a seeded 

DataLoader generator with num_workers=0 ; the repository run did not record GPU model, CUDA/cuDNN versions, PyTorch/torchvision versions, or deterministic cuDNN flags. This experiment is intentionally reported as a small diagnostic. It lacks the baseline set, tuning budget, duration, hardware accounting, and workload diversity needed for a broad optimizer-performance claim. 20 B.4 Trace residual diagnostic 

The trace-level residual audit in section 7 is produced by: 

python experiments/mnist/trace_residual_diagnostic.py --dataset mnist ‘ --max-steps 8 --train-subset 1024 --test-subset 512 --batch-size 128 ‘ --seed 7 --output tmp/trace_residual_mnist_8step 

The script records per-step loss, gradient norm, update norm, open diagonal residual, bounded diago-nal residual, the corresponding GER values, and trace-level bounded-diagonal residual summaries. The run used pi ∈ [10 −6, 1] for the bounded diagonal family and wrote trace_residual_summary.json ,

trace_residuals.csv , and trace_residual_ger.png . The first reported table uses the mean GER over the eight recorded updates for each optimizer. The trajectory-level table uses the ℓ2 residual over the same eight updates: the raw bounded TGER allows an independently selected bounded diagonal scale at each step, whereas the coherent bounded TGER uses one shared bounded diagonal scale over the whole trace, corresponding to the Bgeo = 0 case of equation (7). 21