Title: CARE: Contrastive Anchor-based Rubric Evolution for Large Language Model Post-Training

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.00892v1

Published Time: Wed, 02 Sep 2026 01:15:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# CARE: Contrastive Anchor-based Rubric Evolution for Large Language Model Post-Training 

Siyuan Li 1,* Xinxin Song 1,* Chen Ruinian 2 Jingjing Fan 1

Tingxiong Xiao 1 Yangen Hu 2 Ke Zeng 2 Jinli Suo 1, †

> 1

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University 

> 2

Meituan 

> †

jlsuo@tsinghua.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Rubric-based reinforcement learning decom-poses open-ended instructions into prompt-specific, flexible rubrics, making it better suited than reinforcement learning with verifiable re-wards for post-training LLMs on open-ended tasks. However, static rubrics are inevitably hacked as the policy evolves, and existing dy-namic approaches introduce new problems: undirected rubric extraction, unreliable hack detection, and unbounded rubric proliferation. We propose CARE (Contrastive Anchor-based 

Rubric Evolution), which grounds every rubric evolution step in a high-quality anchor re-sponse generated by a frontier model con-ditioned on the prompt and its rubrics. At each training step, CARE contrasts the highest-scoring rollout against the anchor, enabling two complementary mechanisms: an Adaptive branch that reactively repairs reward misspec-ification; and a Chase branch that proactively converts frontier-level quality gaps into sharper rubrics. Together, the two branches maintain discriminative accuracy in the high-reward region —the precise region where reward over-optimization mostly originates. Experiments on WildChecklist-9K with Qwen2.5-7B-Base and Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct show that CARE achieves state-of-the-art performance on Arena-Hard-2.0, InfoBench, and FollowBench, and is the only method whose win rate against GPT-4.1 anchor responses shows sustained im-provement throughout 300 training steps; ad-ditional results on Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct and Qwen3-8B further indicate that CARE general-izes across model families. 

1 Introduction 

Reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards (RLVR) has demonstrated remarkable success in domains with objectively checkable answers such as mathematics (Lambert et al., 2025; Guo et al., 

> *Equal Contribution.
> †Corresponding author.

2025; Shao et al., 2024, 2025; Luo et al., 2025b) and other programmatically verifiable tasks (Luo et al., 2025a), but open-ended tasks like instruction following and long-form generation still lack reli-able reward signals. A natural alternative is to rely on learned reward models (Stiennon et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2023) or LLM-as-Judge systems (Liu et al., 2023; Panickssery et al., 2024), yet both re-main inadequate for this setting: scalar RMs are vulnerable to reward misspecification and reward hacking (Gao et al., 2023; Coste et al., 2024), while generic judges evaluate against broad rubrics such as “helpfulness” or “coherence” and therefore miss prompt-specific constraints (Zheng et al., 2023). Rubric-based RL is a promising direction be-cause it decomposes each prompt into atomic, prompt-specific, and flexible rubrics, yielding more interpretable and fine-grained reward sig-nals for open-ended tasks (Viswanathan et al., 2025; Peng et al., 2025; Gunjal et al., 2026; He et al., 2026; Huang et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2026; Zhang et al., 2026). However, existing rubric-based RL methods predominantly rely on static, offline-generated rubrics that remain fixed through-out training. As the policy and response distribu-tion shift during optimization, such static rubrics are inevitably hacked (Viswanathan et al., 2025; Huang et al., 2025) and cannot adapt to emergent behaviors (Rezaei et al., 2025; Shao et al., 2026). Recent work explores dynamic rubric generation to address this problem (Rezaei et al., 2025; Shao et al., 2026), but existing methods still lack a reli-able quality anchor. Without a high-quality anchor to ground the comparison, three problems arise: (1) Undirected extraction , where rubric generation compares arbitrary rollout pairs and captures inci-dental behavioral differences rather than genuine quality gaps; (2) Blind hack detection , where the judge must rely on parametric knowledge rather than a concrete non-hacked anchor, making novel exploits easy to miss and legitimate responses easy arXiv:2609.00892v1 [cs.AI] 1 Sep 2026 to misclassify; and (3) Unbounded rubric prolif-eration , where flawed rubrics cannot be cleanly rewritten and new rubrics are only appended, grad-ually degrading verifier accuracy and introducing inter-rubric conflicts. We propose CARE (Contrastive Anchor-based 

Rubric Evolution), which addresses all three limitations by introducing high-quality anchor responses—generated by a frontier model condi-tioned on the prompt and its rubrics—as anchor points . Inspired by Scaling Laws for Reward Model Overoptimization (Gao et al., 2023) and Chasing the Tail (Zhang et al., 2026), CARE is built around a simple principle: rubric evolution should dynamically maintain discriminative accu-racy in the high-reward region throughout training, because this is where reward hacking is most likely to occur. CARE therefore focuses at each training step on the highest-scoring rollout, which is both the response most likely to exhibit reward hack-ing and the most informative sample for diagnos-ing loss of discriminative accuracy in this moving region, and contrasts it against the anchor. This design enables two complementary mechanisms: an Adaptive branch that detects hacking by com-paring the top rollout against the anchor, rewrites or augments the exploited rubric with a [Resist] 

constraint, and enforces it via a veto reward that zeroes the reward of any response violating a resist rubric; and a Chase branch that, when no hacking is detected, extracts the most substantive quality gap between the top rollout and the anchor to proac-tively sharpen discrimination in the high-reward re-gion. By grounding every rubric evolution step in a reliable anchor, CARE transforms rubric evolution from blind heuristic comparison into principled, evidence-based refinement that is simultaneously directed toward genuine quality, capable of detect-ing hacking with concrete reference support, and precise enough to rewrite flawed rubrics rather than blindly accumulating new ones. Our main contributions are as follows: • CARE algorithm. We propose a dynamic rubric evolution framework that maintains discrimina-tive accuracy in the high-reward region through-out training via two complementary mechanisms, and Appendix A further formalizes why online maintenance of high-reward-region accuracy mat-ters. • Anchor dataset. We construct WildChecklist-9K-Anchor, a training corpus augmented with GPT-4.1 (OpenAI et al., 2024) generated anchor responses conditioned on per-instance rubrics, providing reliable anchor points for rubric evolu-tion throughout training. • Strong empirical results. Through extensive experiments on WildChecklist-9K with both Qwen2.5-7B-Base and Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct, CARE achieves state-of-the-art performance on Arena-Hard-2.0, FollowBench, and InfoBench, and is the only method whose win rate against GPT-4.1 anchor responses shows sustained im-provement throughout 300 training steps, demon-strating superior long-term training stability over all baselines. • Mechanistic analysis. We systematically an-alyze and categorize the rubrics extracted by CARE, and further use three representative cases to illustrate CARE’s execution logic and prac-tical effect, providing interpretable evidence of how online rubric evolution repairs hacking and sharpens high-reward-region discrimination. 

2 Related Work 

Reward models and reward hacking. Data-driven Bradley-Terry RMs (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022) compress multi-dimensional re-sponse quality into a single scalar, making them structurally susceptible to reward hacking (Skalse et al., 2022): as the policy optimizes against the proxy RM, the proxy reward diverges from the gold reward in a predictable scaling pattern (Gao et al., 2023), and different RMs trained on the same data share systematic OOD errors that can-not be corrected by ensembling alone (Coste et al., 2024; Eisenstein et al., 2024), and the standard remedy of collecting fresh human feedback is costly and slow (Bai et al., 2022). LLM-as-Judge (Zheng et al., 2023) scales better but uses globally-fixed generic rubrics (Cui et al., 2024) and is prone to position bias (Wang et al., 2024), verbosity bias (Dubois et al., 2024), and syco-phancy (Sharma et al., 2024)—all exploitable under optimization. Generative reward models (GRMs) such as CLoud (Ankner et al., 2024), DeepSeek-GRM (Liu et al., 2025), and RM-R1 (Chen et al., 2026) improve interpretability by generating an ex-plicit critique or rubric before scoring, but such per-rollout generation is highly time-consuming at inference time (Zhang et al., 2026). 

Rubric-based RL and rubric hacking. Rubric-based RL (Viswanathan et al., 2025; Gunjal et al., 2026; He et al., 2026; Huang et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2026; Zhang et al., 2026) decomposes instructions into atomic, flexible rubrics, yielding finer-grained and harder-to-game rewards than scalar RMs; rep-resentative methods include RLCF (Viswanathan et al., 2025), RIFL (He et al., 2026), Rubric An-chors (Huang et al., 2025). However, all rely on static rubrics fixed before training, leaving them vulnerable to the emergent hacking patterns described in §1 (Viswanathan et al., 2025; He et al., 2026; Huang et al., 2025). Recent work attempts to automate this by evolving rubrics on-line (Rezaei et al., 2025; Shao et al., 2026): Online Rubrics (Rezaei et al., 2025) elicits new rubrics by comparing rollouts from the current and refer-ence policies; RLER (Shao et al., 2026) extracts new rubrics by comparing all rollouts under the same prompt. However, neither grounds evolution in a reliable, quality-anchored response, leading to the three failure modes detailed in §1: undirected extraction, blind hack detection, and unbounded append-only proliferation. 

3 Method 

3.1 Problem Formulation Rubric RL setup. Let the training dataset be 

D = {(xi, Ri)}Ni=1 , where xi is the prompt and 

Ri = {r1 

> i

, r 2 

> i

, . . . , r Ki 

> i

} is the corresponding set of offline-generated rubrics. We adopt GRPO (Shao et al., 2024) as the RL optimizer. At each training step, the policy πθ generates G rollouts {ygi }Gg=1 

for each prompt xi. The reward function scores each rollout against the rubric set via an LLM veri-fier:       

> r(y, R) = 1
> |R|
> |R|
> X
> k=1
> 1[rubric rksatisfied by y].

(1) 

Reward hacking in rubric RL. In standard RLHF, reward hacking arises when the policy over-optimizes a learned reward model that serves as an imperfect proxy for true quality (Gao et al., 2023). In rubric RL, the rubric set R plays the role of the reward model; it serves as the proxy that the pol-icy seeks to optimize. Reward hacking therefore occurs when a response y achieves a high rubric score but its true quality q(y) is substantially lower than that of an anchor response ˆy with a similar score: 

r(y, R) ≈ r(ˆ y, R) but q(y) ≪ q(ˆ y). (2) Just as hacking a learned reward model stems from proxy misspecification, hacking in rubric RL stems from rubric misspecification : a rubric may contain exploitable loopholes ( flawed rubric ), or the rubric set may fail to cover newly emergent hacking be-haviors ( incomplete coverage ). Just as the standard remedy in RLHF is online RLHF —periodically col-lecting fresh human feedback to update the reward model (Gao et al., 2023), though costly and slow— the natural remedy in rubric RL is to update the rubrics online as hacking emerges. The two failure modes above call for different targeted fixes: rewrit-ing the flawed rubric or adding a new constraint. This observation directly motivates CARE’s de-sign. 

3.2 Rubric Types and Veto Reward 

We distinguish two rubric types by prefix: • [llm] : general quality rubrics verified by an LLM judge ( e.g. , logical coherence, task rele-vance). • [Resist] : anti-hack constraints introduced by CARE’s Adaptive branch (Section 3.4). When only the baseline rubric set is used, the re-ward follows Eq. (1). When CARE introduces 

[Resist] rubrics, we replace it with a veto re-ward that explicitly enforces these hard constraints, making hacking categorically unprofitable. Simi-lar veto-style rewards have also proved effective in prior rubric-based RL methods (He et al., 2026; Huang et al., 2025). Let RResist ⊆ R denote the set of resist rubrics, and let sr(y) ∈ { 0, 1} denote the verifier score for rubric r on response y. The veto reward can be written compactly as 

rveto (y, R) = r(y, R) Y

> r∈R Resist

sr(y). (3) Since each sr(y) is binary, the product becomes zero if any [Resist] rubric is violated, and equals one otherwise. 

3.3 Anchor Response Generation 

A key ingredient of CARE is a per-instance anchor response y∗ 

> i

= Manchor (xi, Ri), generated offline by a frontier model (GPT-4.1) conditioned on both the prompt xi and its rubric set Ri. We combine rubric-conditioned generation with explicit auto-matic filtering and human validation to obtain an-chors that substantively satisfy their rubrics without exploiting them (Section 4 and Appendix B). Crucially, the anchor serves as a reference point ,not a quality upper bound. Its role differs across Figure 1: Overview of the CARE pipeline. At each training step, the highest-scoring rollout is contrasted against the anchor response. If hacking is detected (Adaptive branch), the exploited rubric is rewritten or a [Resist] constraint is added and enforced via a veto reward. Otherwise (Chase branch), the substantive gap between the top rollout and the anchor is converted into a sharper rubric to improve discrimination in the high-reward region. 

the two CARE branches: (1) in hack detection, it demonstrates what a genuine, non-exploitative satisfaction of each rubric looks like, enabling evidence-based comparison; (2) in quality-gap ex-traction, it serves as a high-quality anchor that is contrasted against the highest-scoring rollout to ex-pose the most meaningful substantive difference between two high-reward responses. CARE there-fore assumes that the task provides reliable rubrics and permits at least one valid reference response. 

3.4 CARE: Contrastive Anchor-based Rubric Evolution Overview. Figure 1 illustrates the CARE pipeline. At each GRPO training step, CARE selects the 

highest-scoring rollout ytop  

> i

= arg max g r(ygi , Ri)

and contrasts it against the anchor y∗ 

> i

.The choice of the top rollout as the focal point follows a simple principle from (Gao et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2026): what determines whether over-optimization turns into reward hacking is the rubric’s discriminative accuracy in the high-reward region . Scaling Laws for Reward Model Overop-timization (Gao et al., 2023) shows that continued optimization eventually exploits imperfections in a proxy reward once proxy scores stop tracking true quality. Chasing the Tail (Zhang et al., 2026) further localizes this failure to the top of the re-ward distribution, where the key challenge is to distinguish excellent responses from merely great ones. Therefore, the central objective of CARE is to maintain discriminative accuracy in the high-reward region throughout training .The top rollout is the most informative sample for this objective because it is the response cur-rently receiving the strongest reward signal from the rubric set. Chasing the Tail (Zhang et al., 2026) improves high-reward accuracy by refining rubrics offline, but that refinement is still fixed before RL begins. As the policy evolves, the response dis-tribution shifts in hard-to-predict ways, so offline refinement alone cannot maintain rubric accuracy in the moving high-reward region and still leaves room for reward hacking. CARE addresses this by refining rubrics online at every step, using the contrast between the current top rollout and the anchor to keep the rubric accurate in the moving high-reward region. Appendix A extends the high-reward-region argument of Chasing the Tail (Zhang et al., 2026) to CARE’s dynamic rubric-update set-ting, formally motivating the need for online main-tenance.Appendix E contains the full prompts used in the LLM verifier and CARE. Comparing ytop  

> i

with the anchor y∗ 

> i

—a reliable high-quality reference in this region—supports two complementary mechanisms for maintaining high-reward discriminability: • Loophole exploitation (Adaptive branch): ytop 

> i

attains a high score through reward over-optimization rather than genuine quality improve-ment, showing that the current rubric is being exploited and that its misspecification must be repaired. • Discriminability enhancement (Chase branch): 

ytop  

> i

and y∗ 

> i

are both frontier-level, high-reward responses, and their substantive quality gap pro-vides exactly the signal needed to formulate a sharper rubric. By converting this gap into a re-fined rubric, CARE increases resolution among high-reward responses and strengthens the high-reward region against future over-optimization. Both branches therefore serve the same goal: con-tinuously refining rubric accuracy in the high-reward region —Adaptive by repairing existing mis-specification reactively, Chase by proactively sharp-ening discrimination before the policy learns to exploit it. The rubrics satisfied by ytop  

> i

are partitioned into 

Rsat  

> i

(satisfied) and Runsat  

> i

(unsatisfied). Hack de-tection focuses exclusively on Rsat  

> i

: a rubric that is not satisfied cannot be hacked. 

Step 1: Reward Hacking Detection and Repair (Adaptive Branch). The LLM judge receives 

(xi, Rsat  

> i

, Runsat  

> i

, y top  

> i

, y ∗ 

> i

) and determines, for each satisfied rubric, whether ytop  

> i

satisfies it in a substantively similar way to the anchor or instead reflects reward-hacking behavior relative to the an-chor. If hacking is detected, the judge: (a) identi-fies the exploited rubric rki ; (b) either rewrites rki to close the loophole, or appends a new [Resist] 

constraint that explicitly prohibits the observed hacking pattern. If hacking is detected, Step 2 is skipped. 

Step 2: Substantive Quality-Gap Extraction (Chase Branch). Executed only when no hacking is detected. The judge identifies the most signif-icant substantive gap between ytop  

> i

and y∗ 

> i

along dimensions such as logical coherence, information depth, accuracy, or task effectiveness. The iden-tified gap is either merged into an existing [llm] 

rubric or added as a new [llm] rubric. The com-parison is bidirectional: the extracted dimension may capture either an advantage of the anchor or a genuine advantage of the top rollout. Thus, the anchor directs rubric discovery without imposing an imitation objective or a quality ceiling. The full training procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup Dataset. We build WildChecklist-9K from Wild-Checklist (Viswanathan et al., 2025), which syn-thesizes rubric checklists from real human–GPT interactions in WildChat (Zhao et al., 2024). We first generate GPT-4.1 anchors for 10K candidate instances and independently validate each anchor with Gemini 3 Pro and GPT-5.4 with high reason-ing effort. The final 9K training set is selected exclusively from the pool unanimously accepted by both judges; Appendix B reports the full auto-matic and human validation results. Each training instance (xi, Ri) consists of a user prompt and its corresponding rubric set. We construct a held-in test set from the remaining WildChecklist data for Win-rate evaluation, consisting of 300 samples. 

Models and training. We train both Qwen2.5-7B-Base and Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct using GRPO, with Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct serving as the LLM verifier and CARE judge. Appendix C presents training configuration and efficiency details. We further report additional experiments on Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct and Qwen3-8B in Appendix D, demon-strating that CARE generalizes across model fami-lies. 

Baselines. To demonstrate that CARE outperforms both existing static rubric-based RL methods and dynamic rubric evolution methods, we compare against the following: • DPO (RLCF) (Viswanathan et al., 2025): DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023) using checklist-annotated preference data from WildChecklist-9K. • SFT on Anchor : supervised fine-tuning directly on GPT-4.1 anchor responses. • Rubric RL : standard rubric-based RL using offline-synthesized WildChecklist rubrics. • Rubric RL w/ Universal Criteria : Rubric RL augmented with two generic anti-hack rubrics following (Viswanathan et al., 2025). • Online Rubrics (Rezaei et al., 2025): a dynamic rubric evolution method that elicits new rubrics online via pairwise comparison of current- and reference-policy rollouts. To further investigate the synergistic effects among CARE’s components, we conduct the following ablation studies: • Chase Rubric RL : CARE with only the Chase branch, the Adaptive branch is disabled. Algorithm 1: CARE: Contrastive Anchor-based Rubric Evolution                                                                         

> Input: Policy πθ, dataset D, anchor responses {y∗
> i}, group size G
> 1for step = 1 ,2, . . . , N do
> 2Sample batch {(xi,Ri)}from D;
> 3Generate Grollouts {ygi}Gg=1 using πθ;
> 4Compute rewards rgi=r(ygi,Ri);
> 5Select top rollout: ytop
> i←arg max grgi;
> 6Partition rubrics: (Rsat
> i,Runsat
> i)←rubrics satisfied/unsatisfied by ytop
> i;
> 7if LLM judge detects hacking in Rsat
> ivs. y∗
> ithen
> 8Rewrite or append [Resist] rubric to Ri;// Adaptive branch
> 9else
> 10 Extract quality gap; merge/append [llm] rubric to Ri;// Chase branch
> 11 Perform GRPO update on πθusing updated Ri;// Policy update

• Adaptive Rubric RL : CARE with only the Adaptive branch, the Chase branch is disabled. • Adaptive w/o veto : Adaptive branch with 

[Resist] rubrics enforced by weighted averag-ing instead of the veto reward. • Adaptive w/o anchor : Adaptive branch with-out anchor responses–the judge relies solely on parametric knowledge to detect hacking, with the anchor ablated. 

Evaluation. We evaluate on Arena-Hard-2.0 (Li et al., 2025) (Vanilla and Style-Controlled), In-foBench (Qin et al., 2024) (Easy, Hard, Overall), and FollowBench (Jiang et al., 2024) (SSR, HSR, CSL). We additionally report Win-rate against GPT-4.1 anchor responses (Zhang et al., 2026) , judged by Gemini 3 pro with random-order sam-pling to mitigate position bias. 

4.2 Main Results Consistent improvements across benchmarks. 

Table 1 reports results on Arena-Hard-2.0, In-foBench, and FollowBench for both Qwen2.5-7B-Base and Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct. CARE achieves state-of-the-art performance across all benchmarks under both model variants. Notably, SFT on An-chor shows strong InfoBench scores on Qwen2.5-7B-Base, surpassing most rubric-based RL meth-ods except CARE and Adaptive Rubric RL, yet it underperforms Rubric RL on Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct and provides even slight degradation on Arena-Hard-2.0—a benchmark that requires broad in-struction generalization. This contrast also demon-strates that RL generalizes better than SFT (Chu et al., 2025). CARE consistently outperforms both static rubric-based methods—Rubric RL and DPO (RLCF)—demonstrating the comprehensive advan-tage of CARE over static rubric approaches. Fur-thermore, CARE surpasses Online Rubrics, show-ing that guiding rubric evolution with high-quality anchor responses yields substantially better results than anchor-free pairwise comparison. 

Anchor as reference rather than quality ceil-ing. The present CARE models do not outper-form GPT-4 on every metric, which is expected given their few-billion-parameter scale, the 9K-example training set, and the absence of a cold-start stage. Nevertheless, Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct with CARE nearly matches GPT-4 on FollowBench-CSL and matches it on InfoBench-Hard, while Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct with CARE exceeds GPT-4 on InfoBench-Hard (Appendix D). In the main single-run held-in comparison, the final Qwen2.5-7B-Base checkpoint also reaches a 47% win rate against rubric-conditioned GPT-4.1 anchors, ap-proaching parity despite receiving no rubric at in-ference time. Moreover, directly imitating the same anchors through SFT yields smaller and less consis-tent gains, including degradation on Arena-Hard-2.0. Together with Chase’s bidirectional compari-son, these results support the intended mechanism-level claim: reference-guided rubric evolution is more effective than treating the anchor as an imita-tion target, although broader superiority will also depend on policy capacity, data scale and qual-ity, anchor and judge quality, cold start, and train– evaluation alignment. 

Long-term training stability and anti-hacking. 

Beyond static benchmark scores, we further exam-ine training dynamics to assess whether CARE’s gains are sustained under prolonged optimization. Figure 2 shows the Win-rate curves against GPT-4.1 anchor responses throughout 300 training steps. CARE (purple) is the only method that shows sus-tained Win-rate improvement throughout training, including continued late-stage gains. Rubric RL (dashed) maintains the lowest Win-rate through-out: its Win-rate peaks around step 100 and then gradually deteriorates, exhibiting a classic reward over-optimization pattern in which the policy ex-ploits the static rubric proxy without genuinely im-proving response quality. Rubric RL w/ Universal Criteria performs more stably overall, but also be-gins to exhibit a declining trend after approximately step 220, confirming that static generic anti-hack constraints provide only temporary relief and can-not suppress the emergent hacking behaviors that arise in later training. The training-reward fluctua-tions are also partially interpretable. The left panel reports a contemporaneous proxy under evolving rubrics rather than scores under one fixed rubric set. A revised rubric affects a sample when that sample is next encountered; with 9K examples and batch size 96, each pass takes approximately 94 steps. Later passes therefore expose the policy to stricter, previously evolved criteria, which can temporarily lower proxy reward around steps 100 and 200 be-fore the upward trend resumes. Independent check-point evaluations, three-seed retraining, and paired-bootstrap tests in Appendix D further show that the late-stage improvement is reproducible rather than an incidental fluctuation. 

4.3 Ablation Study 

All ablation experiments are conducted on Qwen2.5-7B-Base. Results are reported in Table 1 (Base rows) and Figure 2 (Win-rate curves). To-gether, these results reveal the contribution of each component and validate the key design choices in CARE. 

(1) Overall performance ranking. Across the three benchmark suites, CARE outperforms both Adaptive Rubric RL and Chase Rubric RL. The two single-branch variants perform compara-bly overall, yet optimize in different directions: Chase achieves higher Arena-Hard-2.0 scores (9.3 vs. 5.3 Vanilla) while Adaptive is stronger on In-foBench (82.9 vs. 81.1 Overall), indicating that the two branches capture complementary quality dimensions. Both single-branch variants outper-form Adaptive w/o veto, which in turn outper-forms Rubric RL and Adaptive w/o anchor. Rubric RL outperforms Adaptive w/o anchor across two benchmarks—InfoBench (81.2 vs. 77.4 Overall), FollowBench (2.65 vs. 2.57 CSL). 

(2) Necessity of the anchor. Adaptive Rubric RL consistently outperforms Adaptive w/o anchor across all three benchmark suites—Arena-Hard-2.0 (5.3 vs. 4.4 Vanilla), InfoBench (82.9 vs. 77.4 Overall), and FollowBench (2.91 vs. 2.57 CSL)— and also maintains a substantially higher Win-rate trajectory throughout training (Figure 2). This gap is consistent with our direct audit in Appendix B: frontier-judge agreement with Adaptive decisions is 95.2% with anchors but 65.3% without them, while human agreement is 99.1% and 67.1%, re-spectively. A validated, non-hacked anchor there-fore substantially improves the reliability of hack identification. 

(3) Necessity of the veto reward. Adaptive w/o veto underperforms Adaptive Rubric RL across all benchmarks and also exhibits a lower Win-rate trajectory in Figure 2. This validates that weighted averaging allows models to compensate for [Resist] violations by scoring higher on other rubrics, whereas the veto mechanism eliminates this loophole by making hacking categorically un-profitable. Because veto enforcement also ampli-fies an incorrectly specified constraint, its reliability depends on accurate Adaptive decisions; the auto-matic and human audits in Appendix B, together with the taxonomy and representative cases in Sec-tion 4.4, directly evaluate this premise. 

(4) Complementarity of Adaptive and Chase. 

As shown in Figure 2, Chase Rubric RL rises rapidly in the early stages (achieving the second-highest Win-rate through step 150), indicating that proactively sharpening discrimination in the high-reward region is highly effective for immediate gains, but it subsequently peaks around step 200 and declines. This pattern is consistent with accu-mulated misspecification, although the aggregate curve alone cannot determine whether it originates from initial rubrics or Chase-generated rubrics. Adaptive Rubric RL and Adaptive w/o veto main-tain relatively stable Win-rates throughout training but plateau at a lower ceiling, indicating that reac-tive repair alone improves robustness to emerging reward exploitation but does not sharpen frontier-level discrimination enough to sustain further gains. CARE combines both mechanisms and achieves the highest Win-rate as well as the only sustained improvement over the full 300-step trajectory, con-sistent with Appendix A’s account of balancing frontier sharpening against misspecification repair. 

4.4 Analysis: How CARE Works 

Table 2 breaks down FollowBench HSR by con-straint type (Jiang et al., 2024). CARE achieves particularly striking gains on Style and Situation— the two most implicit constraint types, where Style specifies how a response should be phrased and Sit-Arena-Hard-2.0 InfoBench FollowBench                                                                                                                                                                  

> Vanilla Style-Ctrl. Easy Hard Overall SSR HSR CSL
> GPT-4 79.3 76.9 89.3 86.4 87.3 87.8 83.7 3.52
> Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct 3.5 3.2 82.7 76.0 78.1 82.6 71.4 3.05 + SFT on anchor response 1.7 2.7 85.2 82.1 83.1 80.5 72.2 3.18 + DPO (RLCF) 4.6 3.5 84.5 84.1 84.2 83.9 74.3 3.23 + Rubric RL 5.3 3.9 84.4 82.8 83.3 84.1 75.6 3.26 + Rubric RL w/ Universal Criteria 6.0 4.2 85.7 84.1 84.6 83.9 76.3 3.45 + Online Rubric 6.8 4.3 80.8 80.2 80.4 82.4 73.1 3.28 +CARE 10.8 12.2 87.4 86.4 86.7 85.9 78.4 3.50
> Qwen2.5-7B-Base 0.5 1.9 77.4 68.8 74.8 56.8 38.8 1.20 + SFT on anchor response 1.3 2.6 84.0 81.4 82.2 74.4 61.7 2.73 + DPO (RLCF) 1.1 2.3 83.2 72.2 75.6 67.7 51.9 2.10 + Rubric RL 2.0 1.9 81.3 81.1 81.2 71.0 62.8 2.65 + Rubric RL w/ Universal Criteria 2.4 2.1 83.0 81.6 82.0 74.2 64.9 2.94 + Online Rubric 3.2 1.5 80.4 78.4 79.0 72.4 61.1 2.78 + Adaptive Rubric RL 5.3 9.3 83.7 82.6 82.9 74.6 64.4 2.91 + Chase Rubric RL 9.3 10.2 81.7 80.9 81.1 75.4 65.2 2.98 + Adaptive w/o veto 3.4 5.1 83.0 79.8 80.8 72.7 63.4 2.80 + Adaptive w/o anchor 4.4 5.7 78.9 76.8 77.4 68.5 59.3 2.57 +CARE 10.7 11.8 85.0 83.4 83.9 77.3 68.5 3.15

Table 1: Main results after three training epochs on Arena-Hard-2.0 (Vanilla / Style-Controlled), InfoBench (Easy / Hard / Overall), and FollowBench (SSR / HSR / CSL). CARE achieves consistent gains over all baselines on both model variants.Positive results relative to the baseline are indicated in green, negative results in orange. The top-performing variant of each model is highlighted in bold. 

Figure 2: Left: contemporaneous training rewards under each method’s evolving rubric set. Right: Win-rate against GPT-4.1 anchor responses over 300 training steps for Qwen2.5-7B-Base. CARE is the only method showing sustained improvement across the full trajectory. Revised rubrics affect a sample on its next encounter, partially explaining fluctuations near successive data passes. 

uation provides only an implicit contextual back-ground rather than a direct output specification. On Qwen2.5-7B-Base, CARE nearly doubles the Style score (48.0 → 94.7) and improves Situation by more than one-third (55.5 → 73.6), gains that static rubric methods largely fail to achieve. These results reveal that CARE, guided by the anchor, ex-tracts precisely the implicit quality gaps that offline rubrics systematically underspecify and prevents superficial shortcuts from satisfying those rubrics. 

CARE rubric patterns. Beyond aggregate perfor-mance, we also analyze the rubrics extracted by CARE themselves. Appendix B further organizes these CARE-evolved rubrics into a fine-grained tax-onomy. Here we complement that appendix analy-sis with three branch-specific case studies to show how CARE converts concrete anchor comparisons into targeted rubric refinement. (1) Adaptive branch — A1a Word-sense ambigu-ity exploitation. The user asks for a sports broad-cast script, but the original rubric only asks whether the output is “a script.” The model exploits this am-biguity by returning Python code. Comparing it with the broadcast-style anchor, CARE identifies the wrong sense and adds:            

> [Resist] Is the generated script asports broadcast or announcement script, not aprogramming script?

This Adaptive update closes the loophole with-out penalizing legitimate broadcast responses. (2) Adaptive branch — A2d Language substi-tution. For an Arabic prompt, the offline rubrics Avg (HSR) Format Style Situation Content GPT-4 83.7 83.3 97.3 78.2 76.0                                     

> Qwen2.5-7B-Base 46.9 46.7 48.0 55.5 37.6 + DPO (RLCF) 51.9 44.7 58.0 68.2 36.8 + SFT on anchor response 61.7 52.7 78.0 60.0 56.0 + Rubric RL 62.8 55.6 91.0 66.2 38.4 + Rubric RL w/ Universal Criteria 64.9 60.3 91.2 69.7 38.4 + Online Rubrics 61.1 45.2 87.3 70.1 41.8 +CARE 68.5 60.8 94.7 73.6 44.9

Table 2: FollowBench HSR breakdown by constraint type (Format / Style / Situation / Content). CARE achieves the largest gains on Style and Situation. Posi-tive results relative to the baseline are indicated in green, negative results in orange. The top-performing variant of each model is highlighted in bold. 

specify content but not strict language consistency. The model returns a mixed response containing Arabic, Chinese characters, and special symbols. Since the anchor remains fully in Arabic, CARE flags this as constraint evasion and adds:           

> [Resist] Does the response strictly maintain language consistency by using ONLY the language of the prompt (Arabic), avoiding any unauthorized code-switching?

Again, the anchor exposes a real prompt-constraint violation and lets CARE patch the miss-ing constraint. (3) Chase branch — B2a Lack of specific detail. 

For a question about the effects of music on plant growth, an existing rubric broadly asks for “de-tailed examples and specific studies.” Because this criterion is still too coarse, the model can satisfy it with a high-level discussion of possible mecha-nisms, even without citing any named studies or experiments. The anchor, by contrast, includes con-crete studies and findings. CARE identifies this missing frontier distinction and sharpens the rubric into:                         

> [llm] Does the response provide detailed examples and specific studies to support the explanation of the effects of music on plant growth, including at least two named studies or experiments?

This Chase update turns a broad, weakly speci-fied rubric into a more discriminative frontier crite-rion. Together, these cases show the two roles of CARE: Adaptive repairs exploited loopholes, while Chase sharpens under-specified quality criteria. In each case, the anchor makes the update concrete. 

5 Conclusion 

We introduce CARE , an anchor-guided framework for online rubric evolution in rubric-based rein-forcement learning. By comparing the highest-scoring rollout with a high-quality anchor at each step, CARE repairs exploited misspecifica-tion and sharpens frontier discrimination. On WildChecklist-9K, CARE achieves substantial per-formance gains across model variants. These re-sults show that maintaining rubric accuracy online is an effective way to improve both robustness to reward hacking and final response quality in open-ended post-training. 

Limitations 

We discuss the limitations of our study in this sec-tion, focusing on two primary aspects. (1) CARE currently activates rubric evolution at every train-ing step. A natural next direction is to make this process selective rather than unconditional, for ex-ample by introducing signals that trigger CARE only periodically or only on samples with a high likelihood of hacking. Such gating could focus rubric evolution on the most informative failures, improve update precision, and reduce training cost. (2) A second open problem is how to evaluate the quality of generated rubrics themselves. In the cur-rent work, following the intuition of Chasing the Tail (Zhang et al., 2026), rubric quality is improved indirectly by maintaining discriminative accuracy in the high-reward region. However, a principled rubric-quality evaluation framework remains miss-ing. Recent work such as RIFT (Qi et al., 2026) begins to characterize rubric failure modes and au-tomated diagnostics, suggesting a promising direc-tion for combining online rubric evolution with explicit rubric-quality assessment. 

Ethical Considerations 

(1) Licenses. Our experiments use open models and public datasets under their original licenses. The Qwen series models are released under the Apache License 2.0, while Llama-3.1 is released under the Llama 3.1 Community License Agree-ment. The training data is based on WildChecklist, which is distributed under the MIT License. For evaluation, FollowBench and Arena-Hard-Auto are released under the Apache License 2.0, while In-foBench is released under the MIT License. (2) 

Potential harms. CARE is designed to improve on-line rubric evolution for open-ended post-training, but the same mechanism could also be misused to optimize models toward undesirable objectives if the rubrics themselves encode harmful, manipula-tive, or deceptive goals. In addition, CARE relies on frontier-model-generated anchor responses and LLM judges, which may inherit biases, cultural assumptions, or unsafe preferences from the un-derlying models. If such signals are treated as universally correct, these biases may be propagated into rubric updates and may over-reward stylistic conformity or particular response preferences. We therefore view CARE as a research method rather than a deployment-ready safety guarantee, and rec-ommend human review, task restrictions, and ex-plicit risk auditing before applying it in high-stakes settings.(3) AI assistance. We use GPT-5.4 and Claude Code for writing polish and coding assis-tance. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was jointly supported by the Na-tional Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2024YFF0505703) and the Beijing Municipal Nat-ural Science Foundation (Grant No. L257009). 

References 

Zachary Ankner, Mansheej Paul, Brandon Cui, Jonathan D Chang, and Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. 2024. Critique-out-loud reward models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.11791 .Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Tristan Hume, and 12 others. 2022. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. Preprint , arXiv:2204.05862. Xiusi Chen, Gaotang Li, Ziqi Wang, Bowen Jin, Cheng Qian, Yu Wang, Hongru WANG, Yu Zhang, Denghui Zhang, Tong Zhang, Hanghang Tong, and Heng Ji. 2026. RM-r1: Reward modeling as reasoning. In 

The Fourteenth International Conference on Learn-ing Representations .Tianzhe Chu, Yuexiang Zhai, Jihan Yang, Shengbang Tong, Saining Xie, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Sergey Levine, and Yi Ma. 2025. SFT memorizes, RL generalizes: A comparative study of foundation model post-training. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning .Thomas Coste, Usman Anwar, Robert Kirk, and David Krueger. 2024. Reward model ensembles help miti-gate overoptimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pages 50905–50931. Ganqu Cui, Lifan Yuan, Ning Ding, Guanming Yao, Bingxiang He, Wei Zhu, Yuan Ni, Guotong Xie, Ruobing Xie, Yankai Lin, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2024. ULTRAFEEDBACK: Boosting language models with scaled AI feedback. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 9722–9744. PMLR. Yann Dubois, Balázs Galambosi, Percy Liang, and Tat-sunori B Hashimoto. 2024. Length-controlled al-pacaeval: A simple way to debias automatic evalua-tors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.04475 .Jacob Eisenstein, Chirag Nagpal, Alekh Agarwal, Ah-mad Beirami, Alexander Nicholas D’Amour, Krish-namurthy Dj Dvijotham, Adam Fisch, Katherine A Heller, Stephen Robert Pfohl, Deepak Ramachandran, Peter Shaw, and Jonathan Berant. 2024. Helping or herding? reward model ensembles mitigate but do not eliminate reward hacking. In First Conference on Language Modeling .Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. 2023. Scal-ing laws for reward model overoptimization. In In-ternational Conference on Machine Learning , pages 10835–10866. PMLR. Anisha Gunjal, Anthony Wang, Elaine Lau, Vaskar Nath, Yunzhong He, Bing Liu, and Sean M. Hendryx. 2026. Rubrics as rewards: Reinforcement learning beyond verifiable domains. In The Fourteenth Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations .Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, Xiaokang Zhang, Xingkai Yu, Yu Wu, Z. F. Wu, Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Zhu-oshu Li, Ziyi Gao, Aixin Liu, and 175 others. 2025. Deepseek-r1 incentivizes reasoning in llms through reinforcement learning. Nature , 645(8081):633–638. Yun He, Wenzhe Li, Hejia Zhang, Songlin Li, Kar-ishma Mandyam, Sopan Khosla, Yuanhao Xiong, Nanshu Wang, Xiaoliang Peng, Beibin Li, Shengjie Bi, Shishir G Patil, Qi Qi, Shengyu Feng, Julian Katz-Samuels, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Sujan Kumar Gonu-gondla, Hunter Lang, Yue Yu, and 6 others. 2026. AdvancedIF: Rubric-based benchmarking and rein-forcement learning for advancing LLM instruction following. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 18003–18022, San Diego, California, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zenan Huang, Yihong Zhuang, Guoshan Lu, Zeyu Qin, Haokai Xu, Tianyu Zhao, Ru Peng, Jiaqi Hu, Zhan-ming Shen, Xiaomeng Hu, Xijun Gu, Peiyi Tu, Jiaxin Liu, Wenyu Chen, Yuzhuo Fu, Zhiting Fan, Yanmei Gu, Yuanyuan Wang, Zhengkai Yang, and 2 others. 2025. Reinforcement learning with rubric anchors. 

Preprint , arXiv:2508.12790. Yuxin Jiang, Yufei Wang, Xingshan Zeng, Wanjun Zhong, Liangyou Li, Fei Mi, Lifeng Shang, Xin Jiang, Qun Liu, and Wei Wang. 2024. Follow-bench: A multi-level fine-grained constraints fol-lowing benchmark for large language models. In 

Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 4667–4688. Nathan Lambert, Jacob Morrison, Valentina Pyatkin, Shengyi Huang, Hamish Ivison, Faeze Brahman, Lester James Validad Miranda, Alisa Liu, Nouha Dziri, Xinxi Lyu, Yuling Gu, Saumya Malik, Victoria Graf, Jena D. Hwang, Jiangjiang Yang, Ronan Le Bras, Oyvind Tafjord, Christopher Wilhelm, Luca Soldaini, and 4 others. 2025. Tulu 3: Pushing fron-tiers in open language model post-training. In Second Conference on Language Modeling .Tianle Li, Wei-Lin Chiang, Evan Frick, Lisa Dunlap, Tianhao Wu, Banghua Zhu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2025. From crowdsourced data to high-quality benchmarks: Arena-hard and benchbuilder pipeline. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning .Tianci Liu, Ran Xu, Tony Yu, Ilgee Hong, Carl Yang, Tuo Zhao, and Haoyu Wang. 2026. OpenRubrics: Towards scalable synthetic rubric generation for re-ward modeling and LLM alignment. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 17417–17437, San Diego, California, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. 2023. G-eval: Nlg evaluation using gpt-4 with better human align-ment. In Proceedings of the 2023 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing ,pages 2511–2522. Zijun Liu, Peiyi Wang, Runxin Xu, Shirong Ma, Chong Ruan, Peng Li, Yang Liu, and Yu Wu. 2025. Inference-time scaling for generalist reward model-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.02495 .Michael Luo, Sijun Tan, Roy Huang, Ameen Patel, Al-pay Ariyak, Qingyang Wu, Xiaoxiang Shi, Rachel Xin, Colin Cai, Maurice Weber, Ce Zhang, Li Erran Li, Raluca Ada Popa, and Ion Stoica. 2025a. Deep-coder: A fully open-source 14b coder at o3-mini level. Notion Blog. Michael Luo, Sijun Tan, Justin Wong, Xiaoxiang Shi, William Y. Tang, Manan Roongta, Colin Cai, Jeffrey Luo, Li Erran Li, Raluca Ada Popa, and Ion Stoica. 2025b. Deepscaler: Surpassing o1-preview with a 1.5b model by scaling rl. Notion Blog. OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Alt-man, Shyamal Anadkat, Red Avila, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haim-ing Bao, Mohammad Bavarian, Jeff Belgum, and 262 others. 2024. Gpt-4 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2303.08774. Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35, pages 27730–27744. Curran Associates, Inc. Arjun Panickssery, Samuel R Bowman, and Shi Feng. 2024. Llm evaluators recognize and favor their own generations. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 37:68772–68802. Hao Peng, Yunjia Qi, Xiaozhi Wang, Bin Xu, Lei Hou, and Juanzi Li. 2025. VerIF: Verification engineering for reinforcement learning in instruction following. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 30324–30339, Suzhou, China. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Zhengyang Qi, Charles Dickens, Derek Pham, Amanda Dsouza, Armin Parchami, Frederic Sala, and Paroma Varma. 2026. Rift: A rubric failure mode taxon-omy and automated diagnostics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.01375 .Yiwei Qin, Kaiqiang Song, Yebowen Hu, Wenlin Yao, Sangwoo Cho, Xiaoyang Wang, Xuansheng Wu, Fei Liu, Pengfei Liu, and Dong Yu. 2024. Infobench: Evaluating instruction following ability in large lan-guage models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 13025– 13048. Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christo-pher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. 2023. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:53728–53741. MohammadHossein Rezaei, Robert Vacareanu, Zihao Wang, Clinton Wang, Bing Liu, Yunzhong He, and Afra Feyza Akyürek. 2025. Online rubrics elici-tation from pairwise comparisons. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.07284 .Rulin Shao, Akari Asai, Shannon Zejiang Shen, Hamish Ivison, Varsha Kishore, Jingming Zhuo, Xinran Zhao, Molly Park, Samuel G. Finlayson, David Sontag, Tyler Murray, Sewon Min, Pradeep Dasigi, Luca Sol-daini, Faeze Brahman, Wen tau Yih, Tongshuang Wu, Luke Zettlemoyer, Yoon Kim, and 2 others. 2026. Dr tulu: Reinforcement learning with evolving rubrics for deep research. Preprint , arXiv:2511.19399. Zhihong Shao, Yuxiang Luo, Chengda Lu, ZZ Ren, Jiewen Hu, Tian Ye, Zhibin Gou, Shirong Ma, and Xiaokang Zhang. 2025. Deepseekmath-v2: To-wards self-verifiable mathematical reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.22570 .Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. 2024. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathemati-cal reasoning in open language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2402.03300. Mrinank Sharma, Meg Tong, Tomek Korbak, David Du-venaud, Amanda Askell, Sam Bowman, Esin DUR-MUS, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Timothy Maxwell, Sam McCandlish, Kamal Ndousse, Oliver Rausch, Nicholas Schiefer, Da Yan, Miranda Zhang, and Ethan Perez. 2024. Towards understanding sycophancy in language models. In In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations ,volume 2024, pages 110–144. Joar Skalse, Nikolaus Howe, Dmitrii Krasheninnikov, and David Krueger. 2022. Defining and characteriz-ing reward gaming. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:9460–9471. Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. 2020. Learn-ing to summarize with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:3008– 3021. Vijay Viswanathan, Yanchao Sun, Shuang Ma, Xi-ang Kong, Meng Cao, Graham Neubig, and Tong-shuang Wu. 2025. Checklists are better than re-ward models for aligning language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2507.18624. Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Liang Chen, Zefan Cai, Dawei Zhu, Binghuai Lin, Yunbo Cao, Lingpeng Kong, Qi Liu, Tianyu Liu, and Zhifang Sui. 2024. Large lan-guage models are not fair evaluators. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 9440–9450, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zeqiu Wu, Yushi Hu, Weijia Shi, Nouha Dziri, Alane Suhr, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Noah A Smith, Mari Ostendorf, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. Fine-grained human feedback gives better rewards for lan-guage model training. Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 36:59008–59033. Junkai Zhang, Zihao Wang, Lin Gui, Swar-nashree Mysore Sathyendra, Jaehwan Jeong, Victor Veitch, Wei Wang, Yunzhong He, Bing Liu, and Lifeng Jin. 2026. Chasing the tail: Effective rubric-based reward modeling for large language model post-training. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Wenting Zhao, Xiang Ren, Jack Hessel, Claire Cardie, Yejin Choi, and Yuntian Deng. 2024. Wildchat: 1m chatGPT interaction logs in the wild. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 36, pages 46595–46623. Curran Associates, Inc. A Why Online Maintenance of High-Reward-Region Accuracy Matters 

We extend the static high-reward-region argument in Chasing the Tail (Zhang et al., 2026) from a fixed proxy reward to the dynamic setting relevant to CARE, where the rubric reward itself is updated during training. 

Setup. Consider the idealized per-prompt KL-regularized update (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022) 

πt+1 (· | x) = arg max 

> π

ηt Ey∼π(·| x)[rt(x, y )] − DKL [π(· | x) ∥ πt(· | x)] , (4) whose solution is (Rafailov et al., 2023) 

πt+1 (y | x) = πt(y | x) exp( ηtrt(x, y )) 

Zt(x) . (5) Here rt is the step-t rubric reward, r⋆ is the latent gold reward, and ∆t(x, y ) = rt(x, y ) − r⋆(x, y ) is the stepwise misspecification. Let 

Ht(x) = {y : rt(x, y ) ≥ τt(x)} (6) denote the current high-reward region under a threshold τt(x).

Proposition. For any prompt x and horizon T , unrolling the update gives 

πT (y | x) = 

π0(y | x) exp 

PT −1 

> t=0

ηtrt(x, y )



Z0: T (x) . (7) Therefore, for any two responses y+, y −,

log πT (y+ | x)

πT (y− | x) = log π0(y+ | x)

π0(y− | x) + 

> T−1

X

> t=0

ηt

 r⋆(x, y +) − r⋆(x, y −) (8) 

+ 

> T−1

X

> t=0

ηt

 ∆t(x, y +) − ∆t(x, y −). (9) Hence the final ranking between frontier responses is governed by the competition between the cumulative true-quality gap and the cumulative misspecification gap. In particular, if r⋆(x, y +) > r ⋆(x, y −) but  

> T−1

X

> t=0

ηt

 ∆t(x, y −) − ∆t(x, y +) > log π0(y+ | x)

π0(y− | x) + 

> T−1

X

> t=0

ηt

 r⋆(x, y +) − r⋆(x, y −), (10) then πT (y− | x) > π T (y+ | x). Thus persistent misspecification on responses that repeatedly enter the high-reward region can overturn the true ordering even when low-reward-region accuracy remains acceptable. 

Proof. The closed form for πT follows by recursively substituting the one-step Gibbs update. Substi-tuting rt = r⋆ + ∆ t into the exponent and subtracting the expression for y− from that for y+ yields Eq. (9). This decomposition separates the cumulative signal coming from true quality from the cumulative distortion caused by proxy misspecification. The ranking flips exactly when the distortion term outweighs the sum of the initial log-odds and the cumulative true-quality advantage, which is Eq. (10). Moreover, responses outside Ht(x) receive smaller multiplicative weights exp( ηtrt) at step t, so their effect on the final log-odds is exponentially downweighted relative to responses that repeatedly appear in the evolving high-reward region. Therefore, under continued optimization, the dominant source of error is misspecification on the high-reward region that the policy is currently moving toward. Corollary. Suppose that for every step t and every pair y+, y − ∈ Ht(x) with r⋆(x, y +) ≥ r⋆(x, y −),the true frontier gap and stepwise distortion satisfy 

r⋆(x, y +) − r⋆(x, y −) ≥ γt(x), ∆t(x, y +) − ∆t(x, y −) ≤ εt(x). (11) Then any such frontier pair preserves the correct ordering up to step T whenever 

log π0(y+ | x)

π0(y− | x) + 

> T−1

X

> t=0

ηtγt(x) > 

> T−1

X

> t=0

ηtεt(x). (12) Conversely, if a static rubric induces a persistent frontier distortion whose cumulative magnitude eventually exceeds the left-hand side of Eq. (12), then a wrong frontier ordering becomes inevitable under continued optimization. 

Connection to CARE. This corollary formalizes CARE’s key idea: it is not enough to improve high-reward-region accuracy once before RL begins; one must maintain it throughout training. The corollary itself does not prove that any particular rubric-update rule will always reduce frontier distortion or enlarge frontier separation. Rather, it identifies the direction of improvement required to preserve correct ordering in the evolving high-reward region: successful updates should reduce the frontier distortion term and/or enlarge the frontier signal term. Under this interpretation, CARE’s two branches are designed to target these two quantities. When the Adaptive branch correctly identifies an exploited rubric and repairs it, it is intended to reduce the local frontier distortion represented by εt. When the Chase branch extracts a genuine substantive quality gap and turns it into a sharper rubric, it is intended to enlarge the frontier separation represented by γt. Thus, the theory–method link here is mechanistic rather than an end-to-end guarantee: CARE is designed so that successful repair decreases frontier misspecification, while successful gap extraction increases frontier discriminability, helping keep the cumulative frontier signal larger than the cumulative frontier misspecification over training. B LLM-Based Quantitative Analysis of CARE-Extracted Rubrics 

Our Appendix-B quantitative analysis first vali-dates the anchor-construction pipeline and Adap-tive decisions, then presents a fine-grained taxon-omy of CARE-evolved rubrics. Table 8 lists the major classes and subtypes for Adaptive-branch 

[Resist] rubrics, while Table 9 does the same for Chase-branch [llm] rubrics. 

B.1 Anchor Quality Validation 

Anchor validation is integrated into data construc-tion. We generate anchors for 10K candidate in-stances and ask Gemini 3 Pro and GPT-5.4 with high reasoning effort to independently assess rubric satisfaction, factual hallucination, and unsafe or non-compliant content. As shown in Table 3, both judges accept 93.8% of the candidates, disagree on 6.0%, and both reject 0.2%. We construct the final 9K set exclusively from the unanimously accepted pool. A subsequent stratified human audit of 200 anchors from the retained set finds that 199 pass the same criteria (99.5%), independently confirming the quality of the filtered data.      

> Anchor-validation outcome Result
> Both frontier judges accept 93.8% Frontier judges disagree 6.0% Both frontier judges reject 0.2% Human audit after filtering 199/200 (99.5%)

Table 3: Automatic validation of the 10K candidate-anchor pool and stratified human validation of the re-tained 9K training set. 

B.2 Adaptive-Decision Reliability 

Because veto enforcement amplifies an incor-rectly specified [Resist] rubric, we directly audit whether Adaptive correctly detects hacking and in-troduces an appropriate constraint. Gemini 3 Pro and GPT-5.4 with high reasoning effort audit all Adaptive decisions, and human annotators audit 200 stratified cases; we repeat the same procedure after removing the anchor from the detection con-text. Table 4 shows that the anchor raises frontier-judge agreement from 65.3% to 95.2% and human judgment-level agreement from 67.1% to 99.1%. This audit, the complete taxonomy below, and the representative end-to-end cases in Section 4.4 pro-vide complementary quantitative and qualitative evidence for the reliability and specificity of the added constraints.           

> Audit outcome With anchor Without anchor
> Both judges agree with detection 95.2% 65.3% Judges disagree 0.5% 17.1% Both judges reject detection 4.3% 17.6% Human judgment-level agreement 99.1% 67.1%

Table 4: Automatic and human audits of Adaptive deci-sions with and without anchor responses. 

B.3 Adaptive Branch Taxonomy 

Table 8 presents the fine-grained taxonomy for Adaptive-branch [Resist] rubrics. 

B.4 Chase Branch Taxonomy 

Table 9 presents the corresponding taxonomy for Chase-branch [llm] rubrics. 

C Training Configuration and Efficiency 

C.1 Hyperparameter Settings 

We implement CARE on Verl v0.4.0 and conduct GRPO training on 16 NVIDIA A100 GPUs. The key hyperparameters used in GRPO training are summarized in Table 10. 

C.2 Training Time Comparison 

We further compare the per-step training time of Rubric RL and CARE on Qwen2.5-7B-Base. As shown in Table 11, CARE increases the per-step time from 318.2s to 448.9s, corresponding to 1.411 × total time, or a 41.1% increase, relative to Rubric RL. CARE adds a one-time offline anchor-generation cost and a repeated online comparison cost. Let 

N be the dataset size, E the number of training epochs, B the number of prompts per step, G the rollouts per prompt, CA the cost of generating one anchor, and CC the cost of one CARE comparison. The two additional costs scale approximately as 

Toffline ≈ N C A, ∆Tonline ≈ EN C C . (13) Anchors are generated once and cached. Online, CARE selects only the highest-scoring rollout for each prompt and compares it with the anchor, adding B rather than BG comparisons per step. Thus, increasing G does not increase the CARE-specific comparison count. If TRL (B, G ) is the baseline RL wall-clock time per step, the relative online overhead is approximately 

ρonline ≈ BC C

TRL (B, G ) . (14) The overhead becomes relatively small when roll-out generation dominates comparison time. Amore expensive anchor generator affects only CA,whereas a more expensive CARE judge affects the repeated cost CC . For fixed E, both total costs scale linearly with N . As discussed in Limitations, more selective CARE activation is a promising di-rection for further reducing the online component. 

D Additional Results and Statistical Analysis 

D.1 Cross-Model Results 

We further evaluate CARE on two additional back-bone models, Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct and Qwen3-8B. Following the same evaluation protocol as Ta-ble 1, we compare Rubric RL and CARE across Arena-Hard-2.0, InfoBench, and FollowBench in Table 12. 

D.2 Independent Checkpoint Trajectories 

To separate CARE’s progress from evaluation against its GPT-4.1 training anchors, we evaluate Qwen2.5-7B-Base checkpoints against Qwen3-8B-Thinking, which is not used in anchor construc-tion or training, and on the external InfoBench benchmark. Table 5 reports step 0 as the untrained policy baseline and steps 100/200/300 as CARE checkpoints. Both independent measures improve throughout training.             

> Independent evaluation Step 0 Step 100 Step 200 Step 300
> Win rate vs. Qwen3-8B-Thinking (%) 16.0 30.0 52.0 69.0 InfoBench Overall 74.8 80.9 82.1 84.0

Table 5: Independent checkpoint trajectories for Qwen2.5-7B-Base. These supplemental evaluations do not alter the three-epoch results in Table 1. 

D.3 Training-Seed Robustness 

We retrain CARE with three independent seeds using the same hyperparameters as Appendix C and evaluate all checkpoints on the same fixed 300 held-out prompts. Table 6 shows that every run improves by 21 percentage points from step 100 to step 300 and reaches a 45.0% final win rate; cross-seed variation is limited to 0.6 points at step 200. These retraining results are separate from the 47% final win rate of the main single-run experiment.                                

> Seed Step 100 Step 200 Step 300 ∆(300–100)
> 124.0% 35.0% 45.0% +21.0 pp 224.0% 36.0% 45.0% +21.0 pp 324.0% 35.0% 45.0% +21.0 pp Mean ±SD 24 .0±0.0%35 .3±0.6%45 .0±0.0%+21 .0±0.0pp

Table 6: Win rate against GPT-4.1 anchors across three independent CARE training seeds. 

D.4 Paired-Bootstrap Analysis 

We also quantify sampling uncertainty from the finite evaluation set. For each comparison, we re-sample the same 300 prompts with replacement while preserving paired system outcomes, use 10,000 bootstrap replicates, and report two-sided percentile 95% confidence intervals for the win-rate difference. All intervals in Table 7 exclude zero, supporting both CARE’s late-stage improvement and its final advantage over Adaptive.                     

> Paired comparison Difference 95% CI
> CARE 300 −CARE 100 +21.0 pp [+14 .0,+28 .0] pp CARE 300 −CARE 200 +10.0 pp [+5 .0,+17 .0] pp CARE 300 −Adaptive 300 +23.0 pp [+15 .0,+29 .0] pp

Table 7: Paired-bootstrap confidence intervals from 10,000 resamples of the same 300 evaluation prompts. 

E Prompts Used in CARE 

We reproduce the two verbatim prompt templates at the end of the appendix. Figure 3 shows the reward-scoring prompt used for rubric-based re-sponse evaluation, and Figure 4 shows the shared CARE rubric-evolution prompt used by the Adap-tive and Chase branches. Placeholder variables are kept exactly as they appear in the implementation. 

E.1 Prompt for Reward Scoring 

Figure 3 reproduces the reward-scoring template verbatim. 

E.2 Prompt for CARE Rubric Evolution 

Figure 4 reproduces the shared rubric-evolution prompt. Step 1 detects and patches reward hacking, while Step 2 extracts the largest substantive quality gap when no hacking is found. Major class Subtype Definition Typical pattern Typical example 

Semantic ambiguity ex-ploitation A1a: Word-sense ambigu-ity Chooses an unintended sense of a key-word to satisfy the rubric while miss-ing the prompt intent. avoid interpreting X as Y “script” is treated as program-ming code rather than a sports broadcast script A1b: Scope ambiguity Expands a concept beyond its in-tended boundary and therefore mis-classifies the target content. restrict X to the domain of Y “computers” is broadened to in-clude software or digital assis-tants A1c: Referent ambiguity Resolves an unclear reference to the wrong entity and therefore executes the wrong requirement. ensure X refers to [specific en-tity] “the character” is interpreted as the wrong role Content substitution hacking A2a: Fabricated-fact sub-stitution Replaces required content with fabri-cated or incorrect facts that still appear superficially plausible. avoid substituting correct X with fabricated/incorrect X a fabricated Sudarsky classifi-cation replaces the correct one A2b: Topic substitution Preserves the surface structure but swaps in a different core topic from the one requested. avoid replacing [topic A] with [topic B] a technical document is pro-duced instead of a sports broad-cast A2c: Entity substitution Replaces the required person or entity with an unspecified alternative. avoid introducing characters/en-tities not specified side characters are listed in place of the requested main ones A2d: Language substitu-tion Uses the wrong language to satisfy content rubrics. use ONLY [required language]; avoid code-switching an Arabic prompt is answered in Chinese Format bypass & task evasion A3a: Placeholder injec-tion Uses template placeholders instead of the actual requested content. avoid placeholder/filler content the output is {raw_message} 

rather than a real message A3b: Task simplification Substitutes an easier task for the harder one requested by the prompt. avoid replacing [hard task] with [easier variant] it gives an overview instead of a detailed analysis A3c: Formatting abuse Uses formatting to pad the response and hide the lack of substantive con-tent. avoid using [format] to pad con-tent excessive headings and bullet lists replace actual substance A3d: Incomplete execu-tion Completes only part of the requested procedure or task. must complete all steps; avoid in-complete it provides only a code skeleton without implementation A3e: Context reframing Wraps the answer in an unintended fictional or alternative frame. avoid introducing fictional con-texts not specified a direct answer is rewritten as a VR-game dialogue Content injection &contamination A4a: Off-topic garbage in-jection Injects irrelevant material that is unre-lated to the prompt but helps satisfy a broad rubric. avoid irrelevant/off-topic content; avoid garbage injection a Tesla answer is padded with crypto-scam language A4b: Self-meta commen-tary Appends commentary that evaluates the response itself rather than answer-ing the prompt. avoid self-commentary/self-scoring it ends with “The assistant has demonstrated excellent skills...” A4c: Repetitive padding Inflates length or coverage by repeat-ing existing content. avoid repetition; avoid padding the same paragraph is repeated multiple times A4d: Cross-domain con-tamination Mixes in material from another do-main, culture, or language that does not belong in the target response. avoid mixing content from [other domain] entertainment content appears inside a serious policy docu-ment A4e: Unrequested feature injection Adds features or modules that the user never asked for. avoid adding features not explic-itly requested a Python function includes an unrequested logging module Constraint violation hacking A5a: Explicit prohibition violation Violates a clearly prohibited require-ment while still being scored as ac-ceptable. [explicitly stated constraint] must be respected the answer cites GDPR even though the prompt forbids it A5b: Tone/style violation Breaks an explicit tone, style, or regis-ter requirement in the prompt. maintain [required tone/style]; avoid [wrong register] a formal document is written in colloquial language A5c: Context violation Breaks an explicit scenario, role, or setting constraint. must remain within [specified context] out-of-scene roles are intro-duced in a role-play task A5d: Output-format viola-tion Fails to follow an explicitly required output format. must use [required format] only the prompt requests JSON but the answer returns plain text Boundary behavior ex-ploitation A6a: Minimal compliance Satisfies only the weakest literal ver-sion of the rubric without substantive fulfillment. provide [substantive X], not merely [minimal token] a rubric requiring a character name is satisfied by mentioning it only once A6b: Superficial compli-ance Includes superficial markers of com-pliance without satisfying the underly-ing intent. genuinely satisfy X, not superfi-cially it contains humor keywords but is not actually humorous A6c: Selective satisfaction Covers only the easiest parts of a multi-part requirement. must address all [sub-requirements] it lists only the easy requested items and skips the hard ones 

Table 8: Fine-grained taxonomy for Adaptive-branch [Resist] rubrics. Major class Subtype Definition Typical pattern Typical example 

Content completeness B1a: Missing key ele-ments Omits a core element that the prompt explicitly requires. include [specific required ele-ment] a story omits the scene where the king explains the process B1b: Incomplete proce-dure Skips required steps in an instructional or procedural response. include all steps [for X]; cover [step N] a tutorial skips the configura-tion step B1c: Insufficient coverage Covers the task only partially and leaves out important subtopics. cover all [required sub-topics]; include [category X] educational content omits one age group B1d: Omitted constraints Fails to satisfy one of the explicitly requested constraints. address [specific constraint] ex-plicitly the prompt asks for five cate-gories but the response gives only three Information depth B2a: Lack of specific de-tail Provides a high-level answer without enough concrete details or named evi-dence. provide specific/detailed [X]; in-clude at least [N] specific exam-ples a discussion of music and plant growth lacks named studies B2b: Lack of technical depth Misses the technical detail required for a specialized task. include technical details of [X]; provide [specific technical as-pect] a physics-engine tutorial omits suspension parameters B2c: Lack of contextual background Omits the historical, cultural, or situa-tional context needed for a full expla-nation. provide context for [X]; include historical/cultural background a term is explained without its historical evolution B2d: Insufficient support or rationale Gives a recommendation or conclu-sion without enough evidence or justi-fication. support [claim] with [evi-dence/examples]; provide rationale for it recommends a method with-out explaining why B2e: Limited extension depth Covers the core answer but omits use-ful advanced considerations or edge cases. include additional considerations such as [X]; explore [advanced aspect] a correct basic method ignores boundary cases Narrative & expression quality B3a: Weak sensory/scene description Lacks vivid scene-setting or sensory detail. provide vivid/sensory details of [setting/experience] a restaurant review omits taste and atmosphere details B3b: Limited emotional depth Underdevelops emotions or internal reflections. provide emotional depth/internal reflections a dialogue scene shows flat emotional change B3c: Weak immersion Fails to create an engaging or immer-sive overall narrative. create an immersive/engaging narrative a story has the right events but little immersion B3d: Unnatural flow Sounds stiff or transitions awkwardly between parts of the response. maintain natural flow; ensure smooth transitions a character speaks in an unnatu-rally formal way B3e: Inconsistent style or perspective Breaks internal consistency of tone, style, or narrative point of view. maintain consistent [tone/style/perspective] a story switches between first and third person B3f: Weak humor or cre-ativity Meets the topic requirement but lacks originality, humor, or creativity. provide a genuinely humor-ous/creative [X] the joke is on-topic but not funny Logic & structure B4a: Weak reasoning The argument contains leaps, contra-dictions, or unsupported conclusions. maintain logical coherence; pro-vide clear reasoning for [conclu-sion] the claim and evidence in a pa-per are poorly connected B4b: Disorganized struc-ture The response lacks a clear and logical organization. organize [content] in a clear/logi-cal structure tutorial steps appear in the wrong order B4c: Poor paragraph or section transitions Adjacent parts are weakly connected and transition poorly. ensure coherent transitions be-tween [sections/paragraphs] the paragraphs are individually fine but poorly linked B4d: Unclear causality The response states outcomes with-out explaining causes or consequences clearly. clearly explain the [cause/conse-quence] relationship it describes an outcome without explaining why it happened B4e: Internal inconsis-tency Different parts of the response contra-dict one another. maintain internal consistency; avoid contradictions the text first states A and later states not-A Accuracy & faithful-ness B5a: Factual inaccuracy Includes factually incorrect content or unsupported factual claims. ensure factual accuracy; use cor-rect [facts/data] cited research data are incorrect B5b: Prompt drift Deviates from the prompt’s core re-quirement or setting. remain faithful to the original [prompt/context] a story changes a key plot set-ting B5c: Terminology inaccu-racy Uses the wrong or outdated domain-specific terminology. use correct [technical/domain-specific] terminology an outdated technical term is used B5d: Time or setting in-consistency Violates the time period or back-ground setting specified by the prompt. consistent with [time period/set-ting] modern terms appear in a 1980s setting Task-specific quality B6a: Code quality gap Misses domain-specific quality re-quirements for code responses. include [specific code feature]; use [correct API/method] the code lacks error handling or uses a deprecated API B6b: Creative-writing quality gap Misses literary quality such as origi-nality, characterization, or plot devel-opment. develop characters/plot with depth characters are flat and the plot is underdeveloped B6c: Dialogue or interac-tion quality gap Fails to sustain natural interaction or a consistent character voice. maintain character voice/interac-tion quality the dialogue voice does not fit the character B6d: Persuasion or argu-ment quality gap Lacks argumentative force, persua-siveness, or rhetorical impact. provide persuasive/compelling [argument/narrative] an essay makes weak and un-convincing arguments B6e: Instruction or tutorial quality gap Lacks clear, actionable, and complete guidance for a how-to task. provide clear, actionable steps; ensure instructions are [specific/-complete] a tutorial is too vague to follow in practice B6f: Cross-cultural or lan-guage quality gap Misses linguistic or cultural appro-priateness in multilingual or cross-cultural tasks. provide culturally/linguistically appropriate [content] a translation ignores cultural context 

Table 9: Fine-grained taxonomy for Chase-branch [llm] rubrics. Hyperparameter Value 

Rollouts Per Prompt 16 Train Batch Size 96 Ppo Mini Batch Size 48 KL Coefficient 0.001 Learning Rate 1.0 × 10 −6

Learning Rate Scheduler Constant with Warmup Maximum Sequence Length 8192 Training Epochs 3

Table 10: GRPO hyperparameter configuration used in CARE training. 

Model Training Method Per Step Time (s) 

Qwen2.5-7B-Base Rubric RL 318.2 Qwen2.5-7B-Base CARE 448.9 

Table 11: Per-step training time comparison between Rubric RL and CARE on Qwen2.5-7B-Base. 

Arena-Hard-2.0 InfoBench FollowBench 

Vanilla Style-Ctrl. Easy Hard Overall SSR HSR CSL 

Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct 1.0 2.2 83.7 81.2 82.0 77.6 68.0 3.01 + Rubric RL 2.6 3.1 86.3 83.2 84.2 80.5 71.8 3.07 + CARE 8.9 8.7 88.6 86.7 87.3 83.8 73.9 3.31 

Qwen3-8B 7.8 3.2 78.7 75.1 76.2 76.4 70.9 2.71 + Rubric RL 10.9 7.7 82.1 79.0 80.0 79.2 71.4 2.98 + CARE 13.1 16.8 85.6 83.3 84.0 83.2 72.6 3.33 

Table 12: Additional results on Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct and Qwen3-8B with the same evaluation format as Table 1. CARE consistently outperforms Rubric RL on both models. 

CARE Reward-Scoring Prompt 

# Role You are a rigorous and impartial assessment expert. Your task is to evaluate the model's response against the provided scoring rubrics with itemized scoring. # Input Data ## 1. Context/Instruction {{instruction}} ## 2. Model Response {{response}} ## 3. Scoring Rubrics {{rubrics_list}} # Task For each rubric: 1. **Reasoning Analysis**: Provide detailed evaluation of whether the response meets the rubric criteria. 2. **Binary Scoring**: Assign 0 (Fail) or 1 (Pass) score. # Constraints - Focus exclusively on rubric requirements, Ignore response length, formatting aesthetics, or politeness level # Output Format (JSON) **CRITICAL INSTRUCTIONS**: 1. Output must be a single JSON object 2. Format: {"rubric_text": "score", ...},each rubric must map to exactly one key-value pair,values must be string "0" or "1". **The key must be copied verbatim from the rubric text in " Scoring Rubrics" --- do not paraphrase, truncate, or modify.** 3. No additional text, explanations, or markdown allowed 4. Must preserve rubric order from input **Example Output**: {"rubric_1_text": "1", "rubric_2_text": "0", "rubric_3_text": "1" }

Figure 3: CARE reward-scoring prompt used for rubric-based response evaluation. CARE Rubric-Evolution Prompt 

# Role You are a **Rubric Evolution System**. Your task is to compare Agent and Golden responses using an "Anchor Comparison" mechanism: first detect and patch **Reward Hacking** vulnerabilities; if none are found, extract substantive quality gaps to expand the evaluation **Rubrics**. # Guidelines: Principles of High-Quality Rubrics 1. **Atomicity**: Each criterion evaluates exactly one independent dimension. 2. **Binary \& Specificity**: Criteria must be objective Yes/No questions. **Avoid vague terms like "appropriate", "unnecessary", "sufficient", or "good"** --- they are not objectively judgeable. If a constraint targets a specific unwanted pattern, name it explicitly with a concrete example (e.g., instead of "Does the response avoid unnecessary disclaimers?", write "Does the response avoid adding unsolicited moral disclaimers unrelated to the task, such as human rights warnings or safety caveats?"). 3. **MECE**: New rubrics must not overlap or conflict with any existing rubric --- whether Satisfied or Unsatisfied. Check against the full rubric set (both lists) before adding anything new. 4. **Conservative Modification**: Retain all healthy existing rubrics. Only modify or add rubrics when Reward Hacking is confirmed or a clear substantive gap is identified. 5. **Language Consistency**: The final list must use the exact same language as `Current Rubrics `.Do not translate. 6. **Prefix Scope**: * `[llm] `: General quality features, scored by LLM. * `[Resist] `: Rigid constraints against Reward Hacking. # Context * **User Instruction**: {{instruction}} * **Satisfied Rubrics** (scored 1 by verifier --- focus your analysis here): {{satisfy_rubrics}} * **Unsatisfied Rubrics** (scored 0 --- Agent failed these, no hacking possible): {{ unsatisfy_rubrics}} * **Agent Response**: {{response_agent}} * **Golden Response**: {{response_golden}} > **Anchor Definition --- two distinct roles for the two steps**: > * **For Step 1 (Hack detection)**: For any rubric the Golden satisfies, it demonstrates a non-over-optimized, substantively valid fulfillment of that criterion. Use it to judge *how* the Agent satisfies rubrics --- not whether the Agent's overall output is better or worse. > * **For Step 2 (Divergence extraction)**: The Golden is simply a reference point, not a quality ceiling. The substantive gap can go in either direction --- the Agent may be genuinely superior to the Golden on some dimension, or genuinely inferior. Extract whichever direction represents the largest real difference. # Analysis Task (Chain-of-Thought) **Step 1: Reward Hacking Check \& Patching** * **Scope**: Only analyze **Satisfied Rubrics** --- Reward Hacking can only occur on rubrics the Agent appears to satisfy. Unsatisfied Rubrics are listed for context only; do not analyze them for hacking. * **Core Principle**: Reward Hacking means the Agent satisfies the *letter* of a rubric while violating its *intent*. The key question is not "Is the Agent's response worse than the Golden?" but rather: **"For each rubric the Agent satisfies, does it satisfy that rubric in the same substantive way as the Golden, or does it exploit a loophole?"** * **Hack Pattern Reference** --- the following are illustrative examples of how Hacking can manifest. This list is **not exhaustive**: any behavior that formally satisfies a rubric while substantively violating its intent counts as Hacking, even if it does not match these specific patterns: * **Factual substitution** *(example)*: Agent answers about a wrong entity or fabricated context that superficially passes rubric checks (e.g., rubric: "Does the response describe character X?" --- Agent invents a fictional version of X). * **Self-evaluation injection** *(example)*: Agent discovers that "longer output + self-praise " yields higher scores, and learns to append large self-assessment paragraphs (e.g., "This response comprehensively addresses all aspects...") after a valid answer --- adding no substantive content while inflating length or completeness rubric scores. * **...and any other pattern** where the rubric's wording is exploited to pass the check without genuinely achieving the rubric's underlying goal. * **NOT a Hack --- do not trigger patching for these**: * Agent response is more verbose or more concise than Golden --- length difference alone is not Hacking. * Agent response has a different style, tone, or structure --- style divergence is not Hacking .* Agent response is lower quality but fails rubrics honestly --- capability gap is not Hacking .* **Action**: If a Hack is confirmed, identify the exploited `[llm] ` rubric and either rewrite it with `[Resist] ` prefix, or add a new atomic `[Resist] ` negative constraint. The patched rubric must be specific enough to block the observed loophole without penalizing legitimate responses. * **Branch**: **If Reward Hacking is detected and patched, proceed directly to Step 3. DO NOT execute Step 2.** **Step 2: Substantive Divergence Extraction** * **Prerequisite**: Execute ONLY if NO Reward Hacking was found in Step 1. * **Focus**: Identify the single largest substantive gap between Agent and Golden in logical coherence, information depth, accuracy, or task effectiveness. Ignore formatting and style differences. * **Action**: Try to merge the gap into an existing `[llm] ` rubric without breaking atomicity ---merging is valid regardless of whether the target rubric is currently Satisfied or Unsatisfied. If merging is impossible, add one new `[llm] ` rubric that is objective, binary, and not already covered by any existing rubric (Satisfied or Unsatisfied). **Step 3: Integration \& Structured Output** * `final_rubrics ` must include **all** rubrics from both the Satisfied and Unsatisfied lists, plus any modified/new `[Resist] ` or `[llm] ` rubrics added in this session. Do not drop any rubric that was not explicitly modified. * In `<ANALYSIS> `, state: (1) Was Hacking detected --- which rubric was exploited and how? (2) If no Hacking, what is the core substantive gap? (3) Rationale for the rubric change. # Output Format 1. **Strictly follow** the structure below. **DO NOT** use Markdown code blocks. 2. Analysis within `<ANALYSIS> ` and `</ANALYSIS> ` tags. 3. Final rubrics as a valid **JSON list of strings** within `<FINAL_SET> ` and `</FINAL_SET> ` tags. 4. **No text outside these tags.** <ANALYSIS> **Put your detailed analysis here** </ANALYSIS> <FINAL_SET> ["<all Satisfied rubrics copied verbatim --- including their prefix (e.g. [llm], [Resist])>", "<all Unsatisfied rubrics copied verbatim --- including their prefix (e.g. [llm], [Resist])>", "<modified/new [Resist] or [llm] rubric, matching original language>", "..." ]</FINAL_SET> 

Figure 4: CARE rubric-evolution prompt shared by the Adaptive and Chase branches.