Title: Unifying Detection and Adaptation in Task-Free Continual Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.27070v1

Published Time: Fri, 28 Aug 2026 01:02:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# Unifying Detection and Adaptation in Task-Free Continual Learning 

Dezheng Han 1, Anbang Zhang 2, Zhihao Zhu 3,4 , Shuaishuai Guo 1,* 

> 1

School of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan, China 

> 2

Department of ECE, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong 

> 3

National Medicine-Engineering Interdisciplinary Industry-Education Integration Innovation Platform, Shandong University, Jinan, China 

> 4

Shandong Key Laboratory: Magnetic Field-free Medicine & Functional Imaging, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, China {dezhenghan, 202415670}@mail.sdu.edu.cn, azhangay@connect.ust.hk, shuaishuai_guo@sdu.edu.cn 

Abstract 

To mitigate catastrophic forgetting in down-stream continual learning (CL) for large lan-guage models (LLMs), existing methods typi-cally constrain parameter updates or introduce task-specific adaptation modules. However, these methods often rely on explicit task bound-aries during training, limiting their applicabil-ity to realistic task-free scenarios. In this paper, we propose a Fi sher-guided uni fied ( FiUni )framework for batch-level task detection and parameter-efficient continual adaptation. FiUni is motivated by a key observation about the Fisher information matrix (FIM) of pre-trained models: the orthogonality among the principal subspaces of its Kronecker-Factored Approx-imate Curvature (K-FAC) approximation, es-timated from a small number of downstream task samples, can reflect the similarity between different tasks. Based on this observation, Fi-Uni constructs FIM-derived frozen subspaces to guide low-rank adaptation (LoRA), while matching the Fisher principal subspace of each incoming batch window with historical sub-spaces. This enables FiUni to adaptively de-termine whether to reuse existing knowledge, expand a related subspace, or create a new sub-space, dynamically balancing knowledge shar-ing and task isolation. Experiments show that FiUni can effectively infer latent batch-level task affiliations and achieve competitive perfor-mance against advanced task-aware CL meth-ods with fewer trainable parameters. 

1 Introduction 

With the remarkable generalization capabilities of large language models (LLMs) (Raffel et al., 2020; Grattafiori et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2025) across di-verse downstream tasks, enabling LLMs to continu-ously adapt to dynamic environments has emerged as a critical research problem (Shi et al., 2025).  

> Code is available at: https://github.com/SSG2019/ FiUni .

However, direct full-parameter fine-tuning for con-tinual learning (CL) (Zhou et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024) suffers from prohibitive computational and storage costs, and inevitably leads to severe catas-trophic forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen, 1989), where the model loses performance on old tasks after learning new ones. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) (Han et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025), which updates only a small number of original or additional parameters, provides a more feasible solution to this problem. Following this idea, ex-isting parameter-efficient continual learning meth-ods typically manage the low-dimensional param-eter update spaces of different tasks, thereby re-ducing inter-task interference while maintaining fine-tuning efficiency (Wang et al., 2023a; Liao et al., 2026; Biswas et al., 2026). Despite promising performance in multi-task continual learning, existing methods typically rely on task-aware assumptions, where task boundaries or IDs are available for allocating and switching parameter subspaces. In contrast, real-world con-tinual learning is often task-free, with data arriv-ing in an online stream without explicit bound-ary annotations or task identities (Aljundi et al., 2019). Thus, the model must autonomously infer latent task structure while adapting its parameters to incoming data. Although recent methods ex-ploit model-internal task-related signals to relax this assumption (Du et al., 2024), they mainly fo-cus on task-label-free forgetting mitigation, rather than explicitly unifying task identification with the isolation and sharing of PEFT subspaces. To address these issues, we need a meaningful geometric signal that can characterize the relation-ships among different incoming data and further guide parameter-efficient adaptation. Fisher ge-ometry (ichi Amari, 1998) provides a promising perspective for this purpose. Recent studies have shown that the Kronecker-Factored Approximate Curvature (K-FAC) (Martens and Grosse, 2015) arXiv:2608.27070v1 [cs.LG] 27 Aug 2026 Task similarity  ↑ ⟺                                                        

> Fisher subspace similarity ↑
> Task -self: Different tasks Similar tasks:
> Task B
> (Language Inference)
> Task A
> (Sentiment Analysis)
> Task C
> (Sentiment Analysis)
> …
> Task N
> (Language Inference)
> Pre -trained
> Model
> e.g., T5, llama,
> Qwen , …
> principal subspace
> of 𝓐 and 𝓖
> 𝑭 𝑨 ≈𝓖 𝑨 ⊗𝓐 𝑨
> 𝑭 𝑩 ≈𝓖 𝑩 ⊗𝓐 𝑩
> 𝑭 𝑪 ≈𝓖 𝑪 ⊗𝓐 𝑪
> 𝑭 𝑫 ≈𝓖 𝑫 ⊗𝓐 𝑫
> …
> Fisher Information Matrix
> K-FAC Approximation
> ⨂
> 𝓖 𝑨 𝓐 𝑨
> ⨂
> 𝓖 𝑩 𝓐 𝑩
> ⨂
> 𝓖 𝑪 𝓐 𝑪
> ⨂
> 𝓖 𝑫 𝓐 𝑫
> Different Natural
> Language Tasks
> Eigen -
> decomposition
> +
> low -rank
> approximation
> (𝑼 𝓖 ,𝒓 , 𝑽 𝓐 ,𝒓 )
> (𝑼 𝓖 ,𝒓 , 𝑽 𝓐 ,𝒓 )
> (𝑼 𝓖 ,𝒓 , 𝑽 𝓐 ,𝒓 )
> (𝑼 𝓖 ,𝒓 , 𝑽 𝓐 ,𝒓 )
> Low task similarity ⟺low subspace similarity High task similarity ⟺high subspace similarity
> Orthogonal Similarity of Fisher Principal Subspaces Reflects Task Similarity
> For tasks 𝑖 and 𝑗 ,
> 𝒔 𝒊𝒋 =𝑼 𝒊 𝑻 𝑼 𝒋 𝑭 𝟐 +𝑽 𝒊 𝑻 𝑽 𝒋 𝑭 𝟐
> 𝟐𝒓
> …
> 𝑈 𝒢 ,𝑟 :top -𝑟 eigenvectors of 𝒢 𝑉 𝒜 ,𝑟 :top -𝑟 eigenvectors of 𝒜 𝑟 :subspace rank 𝑠 𝑖𝑗 :fisher subspace similarity 𝒢 ,𝒜 :gradient and activation covariance factors

Figure 1: Fisher principal subspaces encode task similarity. For each downstream task, we estimate the K-FAC approximation and extract the top-r principal subspaces of its gradient and activation covariance factors. Higher subspace similarity indicates more similar task geometry, while lower similarity indicates stronger orthogonality. 

of the Fisher information matrix (FIM), estimated from a small number of downstream samples of different tasks on a pre-trained model, can serve as effective fixed low-rank update bases to guide LoRA along parameter-sensitive directions (Han and Guo, 2026). This motivates us to further ex-plore whether Fisher principal subspaces can be used to model latent task relationships among dif-ferent downstream data. Under this perspective, we discover that in the K-FAC (Martens and Grosse, 2015) approximation of the FIM estimated on a few downstream sam-ples, the orthogonality of the principal subspaces, spanned by the top-r eigenvectors of the gradient and activation covariance factors, naturally reflects the geometric similarity between distinct tasks, as shown in Figure 1. Specifically, data from iden-tical or related tasks tend to exhibit higher Fisher principal subspace similarity, whereas those from unrelated tasks tend towards orthogonality. This in-dicates that for pre-trained models, the Fisher prin-cipal subspace not only characterizes the sensitive update directions for the current data but also serves as a geometric signal to identify the latent task affil-iation of each batch in an online data stream. Here, a latent task does not necessarily align perfectly with human-annotated discrete tasks, but rather rep-resents an implicit learning phase perceived by the pre-trained model, characterized by similar learn-ing requirements and adaptation behaviors. Motivated by the above observation, we propose a Fisher geometry-based unified task-free frame-work, named FiUni, for the continual parameter-efficient fine-tuning scenario. The key idea of Fi-Uni is to utilize the same Fisher principal subspace signal to simultaneously perform batch-level latent task detection and LoRA subspace construction. Specifically, FiUni maintains a storehouse of his-torical Fisher subspaces during online training and matches the Fisher principal subspace of each in-coming batch against this storehouse. The resulting subspace similarity serves as a unified geometric signal to adaptively determine whether the current batch should reuse an existing subspace, expand a related subspace, or be assigned to a new subspace. Thus, FiUni jointly models latent task detection and parameter-efficient adaptation within a single framework, enabling the model to dynamically bal-ance knowledge sharing and task-specific isolation without relying on explicit task boundaries or IDs. The main contributions of this work are summa-rized as follows: • We reveal the intrinsic task geometry within Fisher/K-FAC principal subspaces. By uti-lizing only a small number of downstream samples to estimate the Fisher/K-FAC prin-cipal subspace, we depict meaningful task-geometric structures, thereby providing an ef-fective signal for measuring task similarity. • We propose FiUni, a task-free continual parameter-efficient fine-tuning framework that unifies latent task shift detection and LoRA subspace construction via a single ge-ometric signal. Furthermore, we design an adaptive decision mechanism to dynamically balance knowledge sharing and task isolation based on the matching degree between current data and historical Fisher subspaces. • Experimental results demonstrate that FiUni can effectively infer the latent task affiliation of each incoming batch without relying on task boundaries or IDs, and achieve competi-tive performance compared to state-of-the-art task-aware continual learning baselines while requiring fewer trainable parameters. 

2 Related Work 

CL (Zhou et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024) aims to enable models to sequentially obtain knowledge from continuous data streams or tasks while pre-serving performance on previously learned infor-mation. The primary challenge in this paradigm is catastrophic forgetting, i.e., adapting to new tasks tends to overwrite or disrupt parameter rep-resentations crucial for prior knowledge (French, 1999; McCloskey and Cohen, 1989). To mitigate this issue, existing research broadly categorizes CL approaches into regularization-based, replay-based, and dynamic architecture-based methods. Regularization-based techniques (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Zenke et al., 2017; Aljundi et al., 2018) typi-cally preserve crucial parameters of previous tasks by restricting updates on new tasks. Replay-based strategies (Lopez-Paz and Ranzato, 2017; Shin et al., 2017) alleviate forgetting by saving a small number of old task samples or generating histori-cal task samples during the training procedure of new tasks. Moreover, dynamic architecture-based schemes (Lee et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019) pro-gressively expand the network topology to provide additional capacity for new knowledge. Recently, the development of LLMs has shifted the research focus of CL from traditional lightweight classifiers to massive pre-trained models (Shi et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2024). This shift makes parameter efficiency a central concern. PEFT (Han et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025) provides a feasible approach by freezing most pre-trained parameters and introducing only a small number of trainable parameters for downstream adaptation. Typical approaches include Adapters (Houlsby et al., 2019), Prefix Tuning (Li and Liang, 2021), and LoRA (Hu et al., 2022). LoRA intro-duces low-rank update branches into weight ma-trices, and these updates can be merged back after training without additional inference latency. Build-ing on this low-rank formulation, recent works have further attempted to impose pre-defined up-date subspaces on LoRA to reduce trainable param-eters while maintaining adaptation performance (Kopiczko et al., 2024; Bałazy et al., 2025; Gao et al., 2024). For instance, FiLoRA (Han and Guo, 2026) utilizes the K-FAC (Martens and Grosse, 2015) approximation of the FIM from a small num-ber of downstream samples, to extract principal subspaces as fixed low-rank bases, thereby guiding LoRA to perform efficient adaptation in parameter-sensitive directions. This indicates that the Fisher principal subspace can characterize the important update directions of the current task-specific pa-rameters and provide a more geometrically mean-ingful subspace selection for efficient parameter fine-tuning. In CL scenarios, PEFT provides a natural way to manage task-specific adaptation parameters, which can be independently stored, composed, or isolated. Building upon this property, existing continual PEFT methods typically enforce orthogonal con-straints to separate the low-rank update spaces of different tasks, thereby reducing inter-task interfer-ence (Wang et al., 2023a; Qiao and Mahdavi, 2024). Furthermore, recent methods have moved beyond strict isolation and explicitly model shared and task-specific components across tasks to improve trans-fer ability (Liao et al., 2026; Biswas et al., 2026). Although current continual PEFT schemes demon-strate strong performance in task-aware settings, their reliance on explicit task boundaries or task IDs for module management limits their applicabil-ity to task-free online scenarios. While recent task-label-free methods have explored model-internal signals to reduce the dependence on task identities (Du et al., 2024), they mainly focus on update mod-ulation rather than explicitly coordinating latent task discovery with parameter-efficient subspace organization. Therefore, how to unify task-free latent structure identification and adaptive PEFT subspace management remains underexplored. The intrinsic difference between FiUni and the above methods lies in its ability to determine the allocation of incoming knowledge at the batch level within a task-free setting. Furthermore, rather than passively mitigating inter-task interference through auxiliary regularization terms during the training process, FiUni actively confines parameter updates to low-rank subspaces determined by Fisher geom-etry during the subspace construction stage. Impor-tantly, unlike methods that depend on explicit task boundaries to dictate knowledge sharing and isola-tion strategies, the mechanisms of knowledge reuse and task isolation in FiUni emerge naturally from the Fisher geometry induced by the pre-trained model on a minimal set of downstream samples, rather than being explicitly specified by human-annotated task partitions. 

3 Methodology 

3.1 Fisher Subspace Similarity 

We first introduce how FiUni measures the geomet-ric similarity between different downstream data batches through Fisher principal subspaces. Con-sider a linear layer in a pre-trained model with weight matrix W ∈ Rm×n. For a data window 

B, the Fisher information matrix of this layer can be approximated by K-FAC (Martens and Grosse, 2015) as the Kronecker product of two covariance factors: FW ≈ G ⊗ A , where 

A = Ex∼B [xx ⊤], G = Ex∼B [δδ ⊤]. (1) Here, x denotes the input activation of the layer, and δ denotes the back-propagated gradient with re-spect to the layer output. The activation covariance factor A captures the dominant directions in the input feature space, while the gradient covariance factor G captures the dominant sensitive directions in the output gradient space. Together, they charac-terize the Fisher geometry induced by the current data on the parameter updates of this layer. To obtain a compact task representation, we perform eigendecomposition on A and G, and se-lect the top-rdet eigenvectors corresponding to the largest eigenvalues, where rdet denotes the detec-tion rank used for Fisher subspace matching: 

VB = TopEig( A, r det ), U B = TopEig( G, r det ),

(2) where VB ∈ Rn×rdet and UB ∈ Rm×rdet . We refer to (UB, V B) as the Fisher principal subspace of the current data window. For two data windows Bi and Bj , we measure their geometric similarity by the overlap between their Fisher principal subspaces. Specifically, the gradient-side and activation-side subspace similari-ties are defined as 

sU (Bi, Bj ) = 1

rdet 

U ⊤ 

> i

Uj 

> 2
> F

, (3) 

sV (Bi, Bj ) = 1

rdet 

V ⊤ 

> i

Vj 

> 2
> F

. (4) The final Fisher subspace similarity is defined as 

s(Bi, Bj ) = sU (Bi, Bj ) + sV (Bi, Bj )2 . (5) For a multi-layer model, we compute the above similarity over multiple selected target layers and modules, and average them as the overall task simi-larity: 

sij = 1

|L| 

X

> ℓ∈L

s(ℓ)(Bi, Bj ), (6) where L denotes the set of layers and modules used for Fisher subspace estimation. This simi-larity can be interpreted as the average principal-direction overlap between two Fisher geometries. A larger sij suggests that two data windows may come from the same or related latent task phases, while a smaller value indicates stronger orthogonal-ity and may imply the emergence of a new latent phase. Therefore, this metric can be used to de-tect latent task changes in an online data stream by measuring task similarity between different data windows. 

3.2 FiUni Framework Design 

Based on the observation that Fisher principal sub-spaces reflect task similarity, we propose FiUni, a unified task-free continual learning framework for latent task detection and parameter-efficient adap-tation, as shown in Figure 2. FiUni considers an online data stream where training data arrive se-quentially in batches: 

D = {B 1, B2, . . . , Bn, . . . }, (7) During training, we maintain a historical Fisher subspace pool: 

S = {(Uk, V k, R k)}Kk=1 , (8) where K denotes the number of discovered latent phases. For the k-th phase, Uk and Vk are frozen bases derived from Fisher/K-FAC principal sub-spaces, and Rk is the corresponding trainable core Keep frozen           

> during training
> Trainable and
> currently training
> Trainable but
> currently frozen
> 𝐵 𝑖 = 𝑈 𝑖
> 𝐴 𝑖 = 𝑉 𝑖 𝑇
> R
> 𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ 𝑛−1 𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ 𝑛
> W ∈
> ℝr×r
> Pretrained
> Matrix
> 𝑊 ∈ ℝ𝑚×𝑛
> 𝐵 𝑖 = 𝑈 𝑖
> 𝐴 𝑖 = 𝑉 𝑖 𝑇
> R
> REUSE
> Current window
> ℎ = 𝑊𝑥 + ෍
> 𝑖=1 𝐾
> 𝑈 𝑖 𝑅 𝑖 𝑉 𝑖 𝑇 𝑥; 𝑆 = 𝑈 𝑖 , 𝑉 𝑖 𝑖=1
> 𝐾

Decision Engine          

> 𝒔 𝒏,𝒎𝒂𝒙 = 𝑚𝑎𝑥
> 𝒊∈𝑺
> 𝑼 𝒊 𝑻 𝑼 𝒄𝒖𝒓 𝑭 𝟐 +𝑽 𝒊 𝑻 𝑽 𝒄𝒖𝒓 𝑭 𝟐
> 𝟐𝒓
> EXPAND NEW
> 𝐵 𝑖 = 𝑈 𝑖
> 𝐴 𝑖 = 𝑉 𝑖 𝑇
> R
> 𝐵 𝑖 = 𝑈 𝑖
> 𝐴 𝑖 = 𝑉 𝑖 𝑇
> R

𝜏 𝑙𝑜𝑤  𝜏 ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ  

> Low similarity High similarity

ቊ 𝑠 𝑛,𝑚𝑎𝑥 < 𝜏 𝑙𝑜𝑤 ,𝑠 𝑛−1,𝑚𝑎𝑥 < 𝜏 𝑙𝑜𝑤  ቊ 𝜏 𝑙𝑜𝑤 ≤ 𝑠 𝑛,𝑚𝑎𝑥 < 𝜏 ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ ,

𝜏 𝑙𝑜𝑤 ≤ 𝑠 𝑛−1,𝑚𝑎𝑥 < 𝜏 ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ  ቊ𝑠 𝑛,𝑚𝑎𝑥 ≥ 𝜏 ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ ,

𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑠 

Current Model State          

> Low similarity
> ⇕
> distinct tasks
> ⇕
> New subspace
> Mid similarity
> ⇕
> Related tasks
> ⇕
> Expand subspace
> High similarity
> ⇕
> identical tasks
> ⇕
> Reuse subspace
> 𝑈 𝑐𝑢𝑟
> 𝑉 𝑐𝑢𝑟
> Ucur
> Vcur
> Fisher subspace
> of the current
> 𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ 𝑛
> Update the
> model state
> Calculate the maximum similarity
> between the current batch nand S
> Maximum similarity of the
> previous batch n−1 :𝒔 𝒏−𝟏,𝒎𝒂𝒙

Data Stream Figure 2: Overview of FiUni. For each incoming batch in a task-free stream, FiUni estimates its Fisher principal subspace and matches it with the historical subspace pool. Based on the subspace similarity, FiUni adaptively decides to create a New subspace, Expand a related subspace, or Reuse an existing one. 

matrix. For a given layer, FiUni represents the effective model parameter as 

Weff = W0 +

KX

k=1 

UkRkV ⊤

k , (9) where W0 is the frozen pre-trained weight. Un-like standard LoRA, which directly learns a full low-rank decomposition, FiUni fixes the left and right update bases using Fisher principal subspaces and only trains the compact intermediate matrix 

Rk, thereby restricting parameter updates to Fisher-sensitive directions of the current data. When a new data window Bn arrives, FiUni first estimates its Fisher principal subspace by extract-ing the top-r principal directions (Ucur , V cur ) for subsequent LoRA subspace construction. It then computes the similarity between the cur-rent subspace and all historical subspaces using the top-rdet principal directions, with rdet ≤ r, and takes the maximum value as the matching degree between the current window and historical knowl-edge: 

sn, max = max 

k∈{ 1,...,K } s (( Ucur , V cur ), (Uk, V k)) .

(10) This maximum similarity reflects whether the current data can be explained by existing Fisher subspaces. A larger sn, max indicates that the cur-rent data is highly related to a historical phase, while a smaller value suggests that the current data may correspond to a new latent task phase. Based on the matching degree between the cur-rent window and historical subspaces, FiUni adopts a three-state decision mechanism: REUSE, EX-PAND, NEW. This mechanism is controlled by two thresholds, τlow and τhigh .When sn, max ≥ τhigh , FiUni regards the current data as highly matched with an existing phase, and thus reuses the corresponding LoRA subspace by continuing to update its core matrix Rk. When 

τlow ≤ sn, max < τ high , FiUni treats the current data as related to an existing phase with moder-ate drift. It therefore expands the most similar FiLoRA subspace by removing the overlapping components of (Ucur , V cur ), orthogonalizing the re-maining directions, and supplementing them with random directions to increase the subspace rank by ∆r. When sn, max < τ low , FiUni considers the current data geometrically distinct from historical phases and allocates a new LoRA subspace using the current Fisher principal subspace: 

UK+1 = Ucur , V K+1 = Vcur , (11) and initializes a new trainable core matrix RK+1 .The new tuple (UK+1 , V K+1 , R K+1 ) is then added to the historical subspace pool. To improve online detection stability and reduce false triggers caused by sample noise, FiUni adopts a two-window confirmation mechanism. For two consecutive batches/windows, FiUni performs the corresponding REUSE or NEW operation only when both satisfy the same decision condition, mak-ing online task-shift detection more robust. 

3.3 Geometric Reuse and Isolation in FiUni 

Unlike methods that rely on given task bound-aries to actively isolate adaptation modules and predefine shared or isolated parameters, knowl-edge sharing and task isolation in FiUni both arise from Fisher geometry itself, and parameter updates are restricted to the corresponding geometric sub-spaces. Taking the output-gradient Fisher subspace U

as an example, for the current historical subspace set S, the common overlapping component among these subspaces corresponds to reusable shared di-rections: 

U share  

> S

=

> K

\

> k=1

Uk. (12) For any subspace Ui and the remaining subspace pool U¬i, the orthogonal component corresponds to more task-specific isolated directions for the latent task: 

U iso  

> i

= ( I − U¬iU ⊤¬i)Ui. (13) The overlapping components support knowledge reuse across related phases, while the orthogo-nal residuals provide isolation for new or drift-ing knowledge. Therefore, FiUni does not simply switch modules after detecting task boundaries. In-stead, it performs geometric matching at the batch level and adaptively balances reuse, expansion, and isolation throughout the online data stream. In practice, estimating Fisher statistics and performing eigendecomposition for all parame-ter blocks would introduce considerable compu-tational overhead, while our ablation experiments show that the discriminative ability of Fisher sub-space similarity is not very sensitive to the spe-cific choice of layers or modules, but is mainly affected by the number of samples used for esti-mation and the rdet . Therefore, FiUni performs subspace matching only on a small number of se-lected layers. This enables FiUni to perform effi-cient online detection with limited overhead, mak-ing it practical for continual parameter-efficient fine-tuning of large language models. 

4 Experiment 

4.1 Benchmarks and Data Setup 

We evaluate FiUni on three CL benchmarks. Un-like conventional task-aware continual learning, we focus on the more challenging task-free online set-ting, where training data arrive sequentially as a batch stream and the model has no access to ex-plicit task boundaries or task IDs during training. 

Standard CL Benchmark (SC) consists of four text classification datasets: AG News, Amazon Re-views, DBpedia, and Yahoo Answers (Zhang et al., 2015). Following prior work (Wang et al., 2023a), we organize them into three task orders, denoted as Orders 1–3, to evaluate continual adaptation over short classification sequences. 

Long Sequence Benchmark (LS) extends SC to a longer and more diverse stream with 15 tasks (Razdaibiedina et al., 2023). We sample a fixed number of training examples for each task and con-struct three task orders, denoted as Orders 4–6. Compared with SC, LS contains more heteroge-neous task types and more complex task transitions. 

TRACE Benchmark (Wang et al., 2023b) con-tains diverse LLM tasks, including multiple-choice QA, multilingual understanding, code generation, and mathematical reasoning, denoted as Order 7. 

4.2 Task Similarity 

We first examine the core observation of this work: Fisher subspace similarity s, estimated from a small number of downstream samples, can reflect geometric similarity between tasks. Specifically, we use T5-base on the LS benchmark and sam-ple 32 examples from each task to compute the pairwise Fisher subspace similarity s defined in Section 3.1. We then analyze whether the resulting similarity structure is consistent with task seman-tics or task families. As shown in Figure 3 (a), the Fisher subspace similarity matrix exhibits clear task structure. Data from identical or related tasks usually show higher subspace similarity, while unrelated tasks tend to be more orthogonal. For example, MNLI, CB, and RTE, which are all related to language inference, show relatively high similarity. Among sentiment-related tasks, IMDB, SST-2, Yelp, and Amazon are all sentiment-oriented, but Yelp and Amazon exhibit stronger similarity, likely because both are rating-style review tasks. We further evaluate the within-task consistency of this signal through repeated sampling, as shown (a)  (b)  (c)        

> (d) Figure 3: Empirical analysis of Fisher subspace similarity and FiUni decisions on T5-base. Panels (a)–(c) estimate Fisher subspaces using 32 samples per task over all linear layers with rdet = 8 : (a) shows cross-task Fisher subspace similarity, (b) shows within-task self-similarity from two independent samplings, and (c) compares within-task similarity with task-to-other similarity. Panel (d) shows the batch-level decisions produced by FiUni on a task-free stream using 32-shot Fisher estimation, selected Q/K/V/O layers, and thresholds τlow = 0 .65 and τhigh = 0 .85 .

in Figure 3 (b). For each task, we independently sample two groups of examples and estimate their Fisher principal subspaces separately. The results show that two subsets from the same task usually produce highly similar Fisher subspaces, indicat-ing that samples within the same task tend to share consistent Fisher-geometric characteristics. Finally, Figure 3 (c) compares within-task self-similarity and task-to-other similarity. Most tasks exhibit sub-stantially higher self-similarity than cross-task sim-ilarity. In particular, similarities between identical or related tasks are mostly concentrated in the range of 0.6–0.9, whereas low-similarity or unrelated task pairs mostly fall below 0.6. This suggests that ap-propriate thresholds can separate similar tasks from unrelated ones, supporting the feasibility of Fisher subspace similarity as a batch-level signal for latent task identification. 

4.3 Task Detection 

After verifying that Fisher subspaces reflect task similarity, we further analyze the batch-level deci-sion process of FiUni in an online task-free stream. We take up to 1,000 samples from each task in the LS benchmark and concatenate them into a sequen-tial training stream. During detection, the model has no access to task IDs or task boundaries, and makes decisions batch by batch. Figure 3 (d) shows the batch-level decision tra-jectory of FiUni in the task-free stream. When the stream remains within the same task or moves to a related task, FiUni usually tends to reuse an exist-ing subspace or perform a lightweight expansion. When the stream enters a more distinct stage, FiUni can trigger the allocation of a new subspace. For example, within the SST-2 stage, FiUni expands the current subspace when the internal data varia-tion becomes larger. In contrast, when the stream transitions from CB to WiC or from WiC to COPA, FiUni creates a new subspace. We also observe that FiUni’s decisions do not always coincide with human-defined task bound-aries. For some related tasks, FiUni may reuse or expand an existing subspace instead of immedi-ately creating a new one. For instance, when the stream moves from MNLI to CB, FiUni expands the subspace associated with MNLI rather than al-locating a new subspace. During the Amazon stage, Methods Standard CL Benchmark (SC) Long Sequence Benchmark (LS) TRACE Order 1 Order 2 Order 3 Avg Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Avg Order 7                                                                                                                                                                   

> T5-Large SeqLoRA †39.5 31.9 46.6 39.3 4.9 3.5 4.2 4.2 12.1 SeqLoRAReplay 74.0 73.1 73.0 73.3 74.2 72.7 73.9 73.6 34.0 IncLoRA 63.4 62.2 65.1 63.6 63.0 57.9 60.4 60.5 -EWC (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017) 46.3 45.3 52.1 47.9 44.9 44.0 45.4 44.8 -L2P (Wang et al., 2022) 60.3 61.7 61.1 60.7 57.5 53.8 56.9 56.1 -LFPT5 (Qin and Joty, 2022) 67.6 72.6 77.9 72.7 70.4 68.2 69.1 69.2 -O-LoRA (Wang et al., 2023a) 73.2 72.4 70.4 72.0 69.9 68.5 65.3 67.9 23.1 + MIGU (Du et al., 2024) 73.5 71.4 70.0 71.6 65.4 65.2 65.2 65.3 -SpaRTA (Liao et al., 2026) 73.7 70.5 73.8 72.7 71.5 70.5 68.0 70.0 16.7 + Replay 77.0 75.6 75.2 75.9 75.6 73.2 74.1 74.3 36.5 FiUni (ours) †75.6 76.5 73.0 75.0 67.1 67.0 70.84 68.3 32.9
> LLaMA-3.1-8B  SeqLoRA †75.88 74.40 74.35 74.86 67.81 65.93 63.80 65.85 28.23 O-LoRA (Wang et al., 2023a) 69.39 67.58 71.44 69.46 69.54 64.42 66.50 66.82 28.45 SpaRTA (Liao et al., 2026) 76.10 75.69 75.52 75.77 71.34 70.77 72.95 71.69 31.33 + Replay 77.56 77.01 76.03 76.83 73.10 73.05 74.17 73.44 34.16 SeqLoRAReplay 77.02 76.53 76.19 76.58 72.03 72.96 75.38 73.46 33.02 ELLA (Biswas et al., 2026) 77.80 77.20 77.70 77.57 72.87 72.84 76.82 74.18 33.29 FiUni (ours) †78.00 78.20 77.49 77.91 75.74 74.74 77.50 75.99 55.21

Table 1: Comparison results on Standard CL Benchmark (SC), Long Sequence Benchmark (LS), and TRACE. FiUni results are averaged over three random seeds. Methods marked with † do not rely on task boundaries during training. Gray-colored methods use replay data, generated pseudo-data, or external memory during continual learning. Bold 

indicates the best result, and underline indicates the second-best result among non-replay methods. 

FiUni directly reuses or continues training on the subspace previously triggered by Yelp. This is con-sistent with our definition of latent tasks. Such behavior allows FiUni to avoid mechanically allo-cating a separate subspace for every dataset-level task, reducing redundant parameter growth while promoting knowledge reuse across related tasks. 

4.4 Overall Results 

To verify the effectiveness of FiUni in detecting la-tent tasks, we compare it with multiple task-aware continual learning methods. Since task bound-aries are unavailable in our stream setting, we only consider overall accuracy (Chaudhry et al., 2018) 

OA T = 1

> T

PTt=1 aT,t , where aT,t denotes the per-formance on task t after training on the complete stream. We do not consider FWT (Lopez-Paz and Ranzato, 2017) or BWT (Ke and Liu, 2023), as these metrics rely on task boundaries to measure forgetting and knowledge transfer. As shown in Table 1, FiUni achieves strong re-sults across different benchmarks and backbone models, and outperforms strict orthogonal isola-tion methods such as O-LoRA in all settings. This demonstrates the effectiveness of using fixed Fisher subspaces for task sharing and isolation. We ob-serve that FiUni brings relatively limited improve-ment on LS with T5-Large. A possible reason is that T5-Large has a lower hidden dimension, and to keep the FiLoRA parameter scale competitive with standard LoRA, the available rank capacity can be consumed earlier in the long task stream, thereby restricting the expansion space for later phases. In contrast, LLaMA-3.1-8B provides a larger representation space and richer subspace capacity, where FiUni achieves more consistent gains across the three benchmarks. Overall, without using task boundaries or task IDs, FiUni still matches or sur-passes state-of-the-art task-aware continual PEFT methods. This shows that latent task differences can be effectively captured by the Fisher geometry of downstream data on the pre-trained model, en-abling effective continual adaptation even without explicit task information. 

5 Conclusion 

We propose FiUni, a Fisher geometry-based frame-work for task-free continual parameter-efficient fine-tuning in online data streams. FiUni unifies batch-level latent task identification and LoRA sub-space construction through Fisher principal sub-spaces, enabling adaptive reuse, expansion, and allocation of LoRA subspaces without explicit task boundaries or task IDs. Experiments demonstrate that Fisher subspace similarity captures meaningful and stable task geometry, and that FiUni achieves competitive performance against strong task-aware baselines with substantially fewer trainable param-eters. Our results highlight Fisher geometry as an effective and practical signal for scalable task-free continual adaptation of LLMs. 

6 Limitations 

FiUni still has several limitations. First, the de-tection stage estimates Fisher/K-FAC statistics on the pre-trained model, which introduces an extra forward and backward pass. Although this cost is moderate because detection uses only a few sam-ples and selected layers, it may still be noticeable in large-scale online training. A promising future direction is to further study the relationship be-tween task streams and the Fisher factors estimated on the pre-trained model combined with already learned LoRA modules, so that detection can po-tentially be performed with fewer additional passes or reused statistics. Second, computing the activa-tion and gradient covariance factors also introduces additional memory overhead, since activations and gradients need to be cached for selected modules. Although FiUni avoids constructing the full Fisher matrix, more memory-efficient estimation strate-gies, such as streaming covariance updates, low-precision statistics, or randomized eigendecompo-sition, could further improve scalability. Finally, due to computational and memory constraints, our experiments are limited to models up to 8B pa-rameters. We therefore have not fully assessed the behavior and overhead of FiUni on larger-scale models such as 70B LLMs. Further scaling experi-ments would be needed to verify its efficiency and robustness in such settings. 

7 Ethical Considerations 

FiUni is a method for parameter-efficient contin-ual adaptation and does not introduce new data collection, human annotation, or user-facing deci-sion procedures. All experiments are conducted on publicly available benchmarks following standard research protocols. Since FiUni does not require storing previous task samples for replay, it does not add extra data-retention requirements beyond the training data used in each benchmark. As with standard fine-tuning methods for large language models, practical deployment should follow the data usage policies and safety requirements of the target application. 

8 AI writing statement 

This paper utilized AI assistance for language pol-ishing of the manuscript, including vocabulary cor-rection and spell checking. 

References                     

> Rahaf Aljundi, Francesca Babiloni, Mohamed Elho-seiny, Marcus Rohrbach, and Tinne Tuytelaars. 2018. Memory aware synapses: Learning what (not) to for-get. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision .Rahaf Aljundi, Klaas Kelchtermans, and Tinne Tuyte-laars. 2019. Task-free continual learning. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 11254–11263. Klaudia Bałazy, Mohammadreza Banaei, Karl Aberer, and Jacek Tabor. 2025. LoRA-XS: Low-rank adap-tation with extremely small number of parameters.
> Computing Research Repository , arXiv:2405.17604. Version 3. Shristi Das Biswas, Yue Zhang, Anwesan Pal, Radhika Bhargava, and Kaushik Roy. 2026. ELLA: Efficient lifelong learning for adapters in large language mod-els. In Proceedings of the 19th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1907–1924, Rabat, Morocco. Arslan Chaudhry, Puneet K. Dokania, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, and Philip H. S. Torr. 2018. Riemannian walk for incremental learning: Understanding forget-ting and intransigence. In Proceedings of the Euro-pean Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , pages 556–572, Munich, Germany. Springer. Wenyu Du, Shuang Cheng, Tongxu Luo, Zihan Qiu, Zeyu Huang, Ka Chun Cheung, Reynold Cheng, and Jie Fu. 2024. Unlocking continual learning abilities in language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 6503–6522, Miami, Florida, USA. Robert M. French. 1999. Catastrophic forgetting in con-nectionist networks. Trends in Cognitive Sciences ,3(4):128–135. Ziqi Gao, Qichao Wang, Aochuan Chen, Zijing Liu, Bingzhe Wu, Liang Chen, and Jia Li. 2024. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning with discrete fourier transform. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235 of
> Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 14884–14901. Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, and 1 others. 2024. The Llama 3 herd of models. Computing Research Repository ,arXiv:2407.21783.

Dezheng Han and Shuaishuai Guo. 2026. FiLoRA: Parameter-efficient fine-tuning with fisher information-guided low-rank adaptation. IEEE Signal Processing Letters , 33:604–608. Zeyu Han, Chao Gao, Jinyang Liu, Jeff Zhang, and Sai Qian Zhang. 2024. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning for large models: A comprehensive survey. 

Computing Research Repository , arXiv:2403.14608. Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin de Laroussilhe, Andrea Ges-mundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. 2019. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for NLP. In 

Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 2790–2799, Long Beach, USA. Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2022. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In Proceedings of the 10th In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations ,pages 12513–12525, Virtual. Shun ichi Amari. 1998. Natural gradient works effi-ciently in learning. Neural Computation , 10(2):251– 276. Zixuan Ke and Bing Liu. 2023. Continual learning of natural language processing tasks: A survey. Com-puting Research Repository , arXiv:2211.12701. James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A. Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Ag-nieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Demis Hassabis, Clau-dia Clopath, Dharshan Kumaran, and Raia Hadsell. 2017. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 114(13):3521–3526. Dawid J. Kopiczko, Tijmen Blankevoort, and Yuki M. Asano. 2024. VeRA: Vector-based random ma-trix adaptation. In Proceedings of the 12th Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations ,pages 37947–37967, Vienna, Austria. Jeongtae Lee, Jaehong Yoon, Eunho Yang, and Sung Ju Hwang. 2017. Lifelong learning with dynamically expandable networks. Computing Research Reposi-tory , arXiv:1708.01547. Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. 2021. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. In 

Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 4582– 4597, Virtual. Xilai Li, Yingbo Zhou, Tianfu Wu, Richard Socher, and Caiming Xiong. 2019. Learn to grow: A continual structure learning framework for overcoming catas-trophic forgetting. In Proceedings of the 36th Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 3925–3934. Huanxuan Liao, Shizhu He, Yupu Hao, Jun Zhao, and Kang Liu. 2026. Spectral disentanglement: Rank-aware task adaptation for rehearsal-free continual learning in LLMs. In Proceedings of the 64th An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , San Diego, California. David Lopez-Paz and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. 2017. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 30. James Martens and Roger Grosse. 2015. Optimizing neural networks with kronecker-factored approxi-mate curvature. In Proceedings of the 32nd Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , pages 2408–2417, Lille, France. Michael McCloskey and Neal J. Cohen. 1989. Catas-trophic interference in connectionist networks: The sequential learning problem. In Gordon H. Bower, editor, Psychology of Learning and Motivation , vol-ume 24, pages 109–165. Academic Press. Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Te-jani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, and 2 others. 2019. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 32. Fuli Qiao and Mehrdad Mahdavi. 2024. Learn more, but bother less: Parameter efficient continual learning. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 37, pages 97476–97498. Curran Associates, Inc. Chengwei Qin and Shafiq Joty. 2022. LFPT5: A unified framework for lifelong few-shot language learning based on prompt tuning of T5. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Learning Represen-tations .Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Kather-ine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,21(140):1–67. Anastasia Razdaibiedina, Yuning Mao, Rui Hou, Ma-dian Khabsa, Mike Lewis, and Amjad Almahairi. 2023. Progressive prompts: Continual learning for language models. In Proceedings of the 11th Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations .Haizhou Shi, Zihao Xu, Hengyi Wang, Weiyi Qin, Wenyuan Wang, Yibin Wang, Zifeng Wang, Sayna Ebrahimi, and Hao Wang. 2025. Continual learning of large language models: A comprehensive survey. 

ACM Computing Surveys , 58(5). Hanul Shin, Jung Kwon Lee, Jaehong Kim, and Jiwon Kim. 2017. Continual learning with deep generative replay. In Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc. Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Aman-preet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman. 2019a. SuperGLUE: A stickier benchmark for general-purpose language un-derstanding systems. In Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , volume 32, Vancouver, Canada. Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman. 2019b. GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and analysis plat-form for natural language understanding. In Proceed-ings of the 7th International Conference on Learn-ing Representations , pages 1786–1805, New Orleans, USA. Liyuan Wang, Xingxing Zhang, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. 2024. A comprehensive survey of continual learn-ing: Theory, method and application. IEEE Transac-tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,46(8):5362–5383. Luping Wang, Sheng Chen, Linnan Jiang, Shu Pan, Runze Cai, Sen Yang, and Fei Yang. 2025. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning in large models: A survey of methodologies. Computing Research Repository , arXiv:2410.19878. Xiao Wang, Tianze Chen, Qiming Ge, Han Xia, Rong Bao, Rui Zheng, Qi Zhang, Tao Gui, and Xuanjing Huang. 2023a. Orthogonal subspace learning for lan-guage model continual learning. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 10658–10671, Singapore. Xiao Wang, Yuansen Zhang, Tianze Chen, Songyang Gao, Senjie Jin, Xianjun Yang, Zhiheng Xi, Rui Zheng, Yicheng Zou, Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, and Xuanjing Huang. 2023b. TRACE: A comprehen-sive benchmark for continual learning in large lan-guage models. Computing Research Repository ,arXiv:2310.06762. Zifeng Wang, Zizhao Zhang, Chen-Yu Lee, Han Zhang, Ruoxi Sun, and Xiaoqi Ren. 2022. Learning to prompt for continual learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 139–149, New Orleans, LA, USA. Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, and 3 others. 2020. Trans-formers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 38–45. Tongtong Wu, Linhao Luo, Yuan-Fang Li, Shirui Pan, Thuy-Trang Vu, and Gholamreza Haffari. 2024. Con-tinual learning for large language models: A survey. 

Computing Research Repository , arXiv:2402.01364. An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jian-hong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, and 23 oth-ers. 2025. Qwen2.5 technical report. Computing Research Repository , arXiv:2412.15115. Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. 2017. Continual learning through synaptic intel-ligence. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 70, pages 3987–3995. Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. 2015. Character-level convolutional networks for text clas-sification. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , volume 28. Curran Associates, Inc. Da-Wei Zhou, Qi-Wei Wang, Zhi-Hong Qi, Han-Jia Ye, De-Chuan Zhan, and Ziwei Liu. 2024. Class-incremental learning: A survey. IEEE Transac-tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,46(12):9851–9873. Appendix 

This appendix provides additional details and anal-yses to support the main paper. We organize the appendix into three parts. First, we provide a the-oretical justification for why Fisher information can be used to characterize task-dependent geome-try, and further explain why the K-FAC principal subspaces of the activation and gradient covari-ance factors can reflect task similarity. Second, we present detailed experimental settings, including benchmark construction, implementation details, hyperparameters, and evaluation protocols. Third, we report additional experimental results and ab-lation studies to further analyze the behavior of FiUni under different configurations. 

A Theoretical Justification 

In this section, we provide a theoretical justification for why Fisher information can be used to identify different latent tasks, and why its K-FAC approxi-mation allows us to use the principal subspaces of the activation and gradient covariance factors as a practical task-similarity signal. We first discuss the full Fisher information matrix, and then derive the connection under the K-FAC approximation. 

A.1 Full Fisher Information as Task Geometry 

Consider a pre-trained model with parameters θ0

and a downstream task distribution Dt. For a sam-ple z = ( x, y ) ∼ D t, let ℓ(z; θ0) denote the train-ing loss, and define the task-induced gradient as 

gt(z) = ∇θℓ(z; θ) θ=θ0 . (14) The Fisher information matrix (ichi Amari, 1998) induced by task Dt is 

Ft = Ez∼D t

h

gt(z)gt(z)⊤i

. (15) This matrix captures the second-order geometry of the loss around the pre-trained model. For a small parameter perturbation ∆θ, the local change of the task loss or predictive distribution can be approximated by a quadratic form: 

∆Lt ≈ 12 ∆θ⊤Ft∆θ. (16) Therefore, directions with large Fisher eigenvalues correspond to parameter directions to which task 

Dt is most sensitive. In other words, the domi-nant eigenspace of Ft describes the main update directions required by this task on the pre-trained model. Let 

Qt = TopEig( Ft, r ) (17) be the subspace spanned by the top-r eigenvectors of Ft. For two tasks Da and Db, their Fisher princi-pal subspaces Qa and Qb reflect whether the two tasks require similar parameter update directions. A natural similarity measure is 

sF (a, b ) = 1

r Q⊤ 

> a

Qb 

> 2
> F

. (18) If the two tasks induce similar gradient distribu-tions on the pre-trained model, then their Fisher matrices are close, and their principal subspaces are also close. If the two tasks require very different update directions, their Fisher principal subspaces tend to have smaller overlap. This can be formalized using standard eigenspace perturbation results. Suppose the top-r

eigenspace of Fa has eigengap γa, and Fb is a perturbation of Fa. Then the distance between their principal subspaces satisfies 

∥sin Θ( Qa, Q b)∥2 ≤ C ∥Fa − Fb∥2

γa

, (19) where C is a constant and Θ( Qa, Q b) denotes the principal angles between the two subspaces. This indicates that if two tasks induce similar Fisher matrices, their principal subspaces remain aligned; if their Fisher matrices differ significantly, their principal subspaces become less aligned or more orthogonal. Thus, the full Fisher information matrix provides a task-dependent geometric representation: its lead-ing eigenspace captures the parameter-sensitive di-rections of a task, and the overlap between two Fisher principal subspaces reflects the similarity between the corresponding tasks. 

A.2 K-FAC Approximation of the Layer-wise Fisher Matrix 

Although the full Fisher information matrix pro-vides a principled task geometry, it is prohibitively expensive to compute and store for large lan-guage models. Therefore, we use the K-FAC (Martens and Grosse, 2015) approximation to ob-tain a tractable layer-wise representation. Consider a linear layer with weight matrix 

W ∈ Rm×n. (20) Let x ∈ Rn be the input activation of this layer, and let δ ∈ Rm be the back-propagated gradient with respect to the layer output. The gradient of the loss with respect to W is 

∇W ℓ = δx ⊤. (21) After vectorization, this gradient can be written as 

vec( ∇W ℓ) = x ⊗ δ. (22) The layer-wise Fisher matrix is then 

FW = E

h

vec( ∇W ℓ) vec( ∇W ℓ)⊤i

. (23) K-FAC approximates this Fisher matrix by fac-torizing the second-order statistics of activations and output gradients: 

FW ≈ G ⊗ A , (24) where 

A = E

h

xx ⊤i

,

G = E

h

δδ ⊤i

.

(25) Here, A captures the dominant directions in the in-put activation space, while G captures the dominant directions in the output-gradient space. Together, they approximate the layer-wise Fisher geometry induced by the current data. 

A.3 Why the Principal Subspaces of A and G

Reflect Task Similarity 

We now explain why the top eigenvectors of A and 

G can be used to reflect task similarity under the K-FAC approximation. Let Avi = αivi,

Guj = βj uj . (26) Then the Kronecker product G⊗A has eigenvectors of the form uj ⊗ vi, with eigenvalues βj αi:

(G ⊗ A )( uj ⊗ vi) = βj αi(uj ⊗ vi). (27) Therefore, the dominant eigenspace of the K-FAC Fisher matrix is determined by the dominant eigenspaces of G and A. This means that the lead-ing eigenvectors of the gradient covariance factor and the activation covariance factor provide a com-pact approximation to the principal geometry of the layer-wise Fisher matrix. For a data window or task B, we define 

UB = TopEig( GB, r ),VB = TopEig( AB, r ). (28) Here, UB represents the dominant output-gradient directions, and VB represents the dominant input-activation directions. Since the dominant directions of G ⊗ A are constructed from combinations of UB

and VB, the pair (UB, V B) can serve as a tractable representation of the Fisher principal geometry. Now consider two data distributions or tasks 

Da and Db. If they are similar, they tend to pro-duce similar activation patterns and similar output-gradient patterns on the same pre-trained model. This implies that 

Aa ≈ A b, (29) and 

Ga ≈ G b. (30) Under eigengap conditions, the top eigenspaces of these matrices will also be close. Thus, Va will be close to Vb, and Ua will be close to Ub. Conversely, if two tasks induce very different activation or gra-dient covariance structures, their top eigenspaces will have smaller overlap. This provides the theoretical basis for using the principal subspaces of A and G to compare tasks. Instead of explicitly constructing the full Fisher eigenspace, FiUni measures the overlap between the two K-FAC factors: 

sU (Bi, Bj ) = 1

rdet 

U ⊤ 

> i

Uj 

> 2
> F

, (31) 

sV (Bi, Bj ) = 1

rdet 

V ⊤ 

> i

Vj 

> 2
> F

. (32) The final similarity is 

s(Bi, Bj ) = sU (Bi, Bj ) + sV (Bi, Bj )2 . (33) This similarity is a surrogate for the overlap between the dominant eigenspaces of the K-FAC Fisher matrices. A high value means that the two data windows share similar activation and gradient principal directions, and therefore induce similar Fisher geometry. A low value means that their sensitive update directions are more orthogonal, suggesting that they correspond to different latent tasks or learning phases. 

A.4 Implication for Task-free Continual Learning 

The above analysis shows that Fisher information contains task-dependent geometry at two levels. At the full-matrix level, the Fisher principal sub-space captures the dominant parameter directions to which a task is most sensitive. Under the K-FAC approximation, this geometry is represented by the principal subspaces of the activation covariance factor A and the gradient covariance factor G.This explains why the Fisher/K-FAC principal subspaces can be used for latent task identification in an online task-free stream. If an incoming batch belongs to an existing latent task, its Fisher prin-cipal subspace should have high similarity with historical subspaces. If it corresponds to a new or substantially different latent phase, its Fisher sub-space should have low similarity to all historical subspaces. Intermediate similarity naturally corre-sponds to partial overlap, motivating the expansion operation in FiUni. Therefore, Fisher geometry provides a unified signal for both detecting the latent task affiliation of each incoming batch and constructing the corre-sponding low-rank adaptation subspace. 

Connection to subspace Methods. The above analysis also provides a possible explanation for why subspace methods, such as SeqLoRA and O-LoRA, can be effective in continual learning. We conjecture that, around a pre-trained model, dif-ferent downstream tasks do not explore the en-tire parameter space uniformly, but instead tend to update along Fisher-sensitive directions induced by their task data. As a result, the effective up-date space used by each task may occupy only a low-dimensional subspace of the full parameter space. When different tasks correspond to distinct Fisher-sensitive directions, stochastic gradient de-scent may naturally push their updates toward par-tially separated or nearly orthogonal regions during training. From this perspective, orthogonal constraints and subspace allocation mechanisms may not cre-ate task isolation from scratch; rather, they may reinforce the implicit geometric separation induced jointly by the pre-trained model and downstream tasks. Thus, the effectiveness of these methods may not solely come from the imposed orthog-onality constraints, but may also rely on a task-related geometric structure that already exists near the pre-trained model: different tasks correspond to different dominant Fisher directions, while re-lated tasks share partially overlapping directions. This perspective suggests that parameter isolation and knowledge reuse in continual learning can be understood as explicit ways of exploiting this pre-training-induced geometric structure. 

B System-level Explanation of FiUni 

Notably, the Fisher subspace similarity based de-tection mechanism is not tied to a specific LoRA adaptation design. Since it only relies on the geo-metric matching between the Fisher principal sub-space of the current batch and historical subspaces, it can serve as a standalone upstream module for latent task identification and be plugged into other continual learning methods or task-expert selec-tion scenarios. FiUni further combines this de-tection mechanism with Fisher-guided LoRA sub-space construction to enable task-free continual parameter-efficient fine-tuning. 

C Experimental Settings 

C.1 Benchmarks 

We evaluate FiUni on three continual learning benchmarks: Standard CL Benchmark (SC) 

(Zhang et al., 2015), Long Sequence Benchmark (LS) (Razdaibiedina et al., 2023), and TRACE 

(Wang et al., 2023b). These benchmarks cover task streams of different lengths, domains, and task formats. SC focuses on short text classification sequences, LS extends the setting to longer and more heterogeneous classification-oriented task streams by incorporating additional tasks from GLUE (Wang et al., 2019b) and SuperGLUE (Wang et al., 2019a), and TRACE further intro-duces diverse LLM-oriented tasks such as multilin-gual understanding, code completion, mathemati-cal reasoning, and question answering. The bench-mark composition and task orders are summarized in Tables 2, 3, and 4. For the SC and LS benchmarks, we follow the same data sampling protocol as prior studies (Wang et al., 2023a; Liao et al., 2026). Specifically, we use the same task orders and the same sampled training and evaluation splits provided in their official code repositories, ensuring that both training and testing data are consistent with existing baselines for fair comparison. In addition to hiding task boundaries, our set-ting differs from task-aware continual learning in how the data stream is constructed. We concatenate datasets from different tasks into a single continu-ous stream. As a result, around a manually defined task boundary, a training batch may contain sam-ples from two substantially different datasets. This makes our task-free benchmark closer to realistic online scenarios and more challenging than the standard task-aware setting. Dataset Name Category Task Domain Metric                                                             

> Yelp CL Benchmark Sentiment Analysis Yelp Reviews Accuracy Amazon CL Benchmark Sentiment Analysis Amazon Reviews Accuracy DBpedia CL Benchmark Topic Classification Wikipedia Accuracy Yahoo CL Benchmark Topic Classification Yahoo Q&A Accuracy AG News CL Benchmark Topic Classification News Accuracy MNLI GLUE Natural Language Inference Various Accuracy QQP GLUE Paraphrase Detection Quora Accuracy RTE GLUE Natural Language Inference News, Wikipedia Accuracy SST-2 GLUE Sentiment Analysis Movie Reviews Accuracy WiC SuperGLUE Word Sense Disambiguation Lexical Databases Accuracy CB SuperGLUE Natural Language Inference Various Accuracy COPA SuperGLUE Question Answering Blogs, Encyclopedia Accuracy BoolQA SuperGLUE Boolean Question Answering Wikipedia Accuracy MultiRC SuperGLUE Question Answering Various Accuracy IMDB SuperGLUE Sentiment Analysis Movie Reviews Accuracy

Table 2: Task details of the Long Sequence Benchmark (LS). The first five datasets correspond to the standard CL benchmark, while the remaining tasks are drawn from GLUE, SuperGLUE, and IMDB.                                              

> Dataset Source Avg. Len. Metric Language #Data
> Domain-specific
> ScienceQA Science 210 Accuracy English 5,000 FOMC Finance 51 Accuracy English 5,000 MeetingBank Meeting 2853 ROUGE-L English 5,000
> Multi-lingual
> C-STANCE Social Media 127 Accuracy Chinese 5,000 20Minuten News 382 SARI German 5,000
> Code Completion
> Py150 GitHub 422 Edit Similarity Python 5,000
> Mathematical Reasoning
> NumGLUE-cm Math 32 Accuracy English 5,000 NumGLUE-ds Math 21 Accuracy English 5,000

Table 3: Task details of TRACE. The benchmark covers domain-specific tasks, multilingual tasks, code completion, and mathematical reasoning. 

C.2 Baselines 

We compare FiUni with a broad set of continual learning and parameter-efficient fine-tuning base-lines. These baselines cover sequential LoRA train-ing, replay-based methods, regularization-based continual learning, prompt-based continual learn-ing, and recent orthogonal or subspace-based con-tinual PEFT methods. 

SeqLoRA. SeqLoRA sequentially trains LoRA modules on the task stream without preserving pre-vious task knowledge or allocating task specific subspaces. It serves as a simple continual PEFT baseline that directly applies LoRA to sequential learning. 

SeqLoRAReplay. SeqLoRAReplay extends Se-qLoRA with experience replay. During training on new tasks, it reuses a small number of stored examples from previous tasks to reduce forgetting. 

IncLoRA. IncLoRA incrementally introduces new LoRA parameters for newly encountered tasks. Instead of using a single shared LoRA module, it expands adaptation parameters along the task sequence to provide additional capacity for new knowledge. 

EWC (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017). Elastic Weight Consolidation is a regularization based continual learning method. It estimates parameter impor-tance, typically using Fisher information, and pe-nalizes changes to parameters important for previ-ous tasks. 

L2P (Wang et al., 2022). Learning to Prompt main-tains a pool of learnable prompts and selects input relevant prompts during training. It adapts to new tasks by reusing and updating prompt knowledge from previous tasks. 

LFPT5 (Qin and Joty, 2022). LFPT5 continuously Benchmark Order Task Sequence                                                                                                                         

> Standard CL Benchmark 1DBpedia →Amazon →Yahoo →AG News 2DBpedia →Amazon →AG News →Yahoo 3Yahoo →Amazon →AG News →DBpedia Long Sequence Benchmark 4MNLI →CB →WiC →COPA →QQP →BoolQA →RTE →IMDB →
> Yelp →Amazon →SST-2 →DBpedia →AG News →MultiRC →Yahoo 5MultiRC →BoolQA →WiC →MNLI →CB →COPA →QQP →RTE →
> IMDB →SST-2 →DBpedia →AG News →Yelp →Amazon →Yahoo 6Yelp →Amazon →MNLI →CB →COPA →QQP →RTE →IMDB →
> SST-2 →DBpedia →AG News →Yahoo →MultiRC →BoolQA →WiC TRACE 7C-STANCE →FOMC →MeetingBank →Py150 →ScienceQA →
> NumGLUE-cm →NumGLUE-ds →20Minuten

Table 4: Task orders used in our continual learning experiments. Orders 1–3 correspond to SC, Orders 4–6 correspond to LS, and Order 7 corresponds to TRACE. 

trains soft prompts for T5 based continual learning. The learned prompts are used both for task solv-ing and pseudo sample generation, which supports experience replay. 

O-LoRA (Wang et al., 2023a). O-LoRA reduces task interference by enforcing orthogonality among the low rank update spaces of different tasks. In this way, task specific parameter updates are isolated in separate subspaces. 

MIGU (Du et al., 2024). MIGU is a rehearsal free and task label free continual learning method. It exploits the magnitude distribution of outputs in linear layers and updates parameters with large out-put magnitudes to reduce gradient conflicts across tasks. 

SpaRTA (Liao et al., 2026). SpaRTA is a continual PEFT method that manages task specific and shared adaptation components. It aims to reduce forgetting while preserving transfer across related tasks. 

ELLA (Biswas et al., 2026). ELLA is a continual PEFT baseline that models task relationships in the adaptation space. It encourages knowledge sharing across related tasks while maintaining task specific components to reduce interference. 

C.3 Implementation Details 

We implement all experiments based on Transform-ers 4.57.6 (Wolf et al., 2020) and PyTorch 2.6.0 (Paszke et al., 2019). To ensure consistency across different methods, all baselines and FiUni are eval-uated under the same software environment and hardware configuration. All experiments are con-ducted on a single NVIDIA RTX 6000 Ada Gen-eration GPU. All models are initialized in bfloat16 (bf16) precision to reduce memory usage and com-putational overhead. Unless otherwise specified, all methods use the same backbone model, task orders, data splits, and evaluation protocol within each benchmark to ensure fair comparison. For the SC and LS benchmarks, we concatenate all training data according to the predefined task orders and feed them into the model as a continu-ous batch stream. This setting simulates an online task-free continual learning scenario, where data arrive sequentially and the model must update it-self based only on the current batch. During train-ing, the model has no access to task boundaries or task IDs, and therefore cannot rely on explicit task-switching signals to create, select, or reset adaptation modules. For the TRACE benchmark, different tasks in-volve different batch size requirements. Therefore, for data-format compatibility, we organize training batches task by task rather than directly mixing all samples into a single stream. However, this does not provide task-aware supervision to the model: task identities and explicit task-switching signals are still hidden during training. For each incoming batch, its latent task affiliation and the correspond-ing subspace management decision are determined adaptively by FiUni based on Fisher subspace sim-ilarity. We summarize the hyperparameters used for dif-ferent backbones and benchmarks in Tables 5 and 6. Here, r denotes the LoRA/FiLoRA subspace rank, 

rdet denotes the detection rank used for Fisher sub-space matching, and ∆r denotes the additional rank introduced during expansion. The thresholds τlow 

and τhigh control the New, Expand, and Reuse deci-sions. We use Ladapt for the layers used in adapta-Hyperparameter T5-large Llama-3.1-8B SC LS TRACE SC LS TRACE                   

> Batch size 32 Learning rate 1e-3 1e-4 Epochs 1FiLoRA rank r32 128 Dropout 00.05 00.1 0.1 0Adaptation layers Ladapt all Target modules Mq,k,v,o q,v

Table 5: Training and adaptation hyperparameters for FiUni. Batch size denotes the effective batch size, computed as the raw batch size multiplied by the number of gradient accumulation steps.                                      

> Hyperparameter T5-large Llama-3.1-8B SC LS TRACE SC LS TRACE
> Detection rank rdet 48Expansion rank ∆r044888
> τlow 0.5 0.6
> τhigh 0.7 Detection layers Ldet 23 31 Expand cooldown Cexpand 50 200 100 40 40 40 New cooldown Cnew 30 10 100 10 10 10

Table 6: Detection and decision hyperparameters for FiUni. 

tion, Ldet for the layers used in Fisher-based detec-tion, and M for the target modules. The cooldown steps Cexpand and Cnew prevent Expand and New operations from being triggered too frequently. 

D Additional Results 

D.1 Ablation on Fisher Subspace Similarity Computation 

We further analyze how the computation of Fisher subspace similarity s is affected by different de-sign choices, including the detection rank rdet , the number of samples used for Fisher estimation, the selected modules, and the selected layers. Unless otherwise specified, the ablation is conducted on the LS benchmark using the same similarity compu-tation protocol as in the main paper. Each figure re-ports both the task-level Fisher subspace similarity matrix and the scatter plot comparing within-task self-similarity with task-to-other similarity. 

Effect of detection rank. Figure 4 shows the ef-fect of using different detection ranks. When rdet 

is too small, the estimated Fisher subspace may not contain enough task-discriminative directions, lead-ing to weaker separation between self-similarity and task-to-other similarity. As rdet increases, the similarity structure becomes more stable and better reflects task-level relationships. However, using an overly large rank may also introduce less infor-mative directions, making the similarity signal less concentrated. This motivates the use of a moderate detection rank in FiUni. 

Effect of Fisher estimation samples. Figure 5 studies the influence of the number of samples used for estimating the Fisher/K-FAC factors. With very few samples, the estimated Fisher statistics are nois-ier, and the resulting similarity signal becomes less stable. Increasing the number of samples improves the consistency of within-task self-similarity and makes the separation from unrelated tasks clearer. These results show that Fisher subspace similarity can be estimated from a small number of down-stream samples, while a sufficient sample size is still helpful for robust task discrimination. 

Effect of module selection. Figure 6 compares different choices of Transformer modules for Fisher subspace estimation. The results indicate that the similarity pattern is relatively robust across dif-ferent module selections. In particular, attention-related modules already provide meaningful task-discriminative signals, suggesting that FiUni does not require estimating Fisher statistics on all mod-ules to obtain useful task geometry. This supports Rank_2  Rank_4  Rank_16  Rank_32 Rank_8 Figure 4: Ablation on the detection rank rdet for Fisher subspace similarity computation. A moderate rank provides a stable separation between within-task self-similarity and task-to-other similarity. 

our design of performing detection only on selected modules to reduce computation. 

Effect of layer selection. Figure 7 evalu-ates whether Fisher subspace similarity depends strongly on the choice of layers. We observe that different layer selections produce broadly consis-tent task-similarity patterns. This suggests that the task-discriminative Fisher geometry is not lim-ited to a specific layer, and reliable detection can be achieved using only a subset of layers. There-fore, FiUni can reduce online detection overhead by computing Fisher subspace similarity on selected layers rather than all parameter blocks. Overall, these ablations show that Fisher sub-space similarity is a robust signal for capturing task-level geometry. Although the quality of the signal is affected by the number of estimation samples and the detection rank, it remains relatively stable across different module and layer selections. This supports FiUni’s practical design of using a mod-erate detection rank, a small number of Fisher esti-mation samples, and only selected modules/layers for efficient online task-free detection. Meanwhile, although the overall similarity values decrease un-der extremely few-shot estimation and the separa-tion between related and unrelated tasks becomes less pronounced, the within-task similarity still re-mains the highest for most tasks. This suggests that Fisher subspace similarity can still preserve a certain degree of task-discriminative signal in low-sample regimes, providing a practical basis for sample-efficient batch-level detection in down-stream continual adaptation. 

D.2 Training Dynamics and Decision Trajectory 

We further analyze the online behavior of FiUni by jointly examining the training loss and the corre-sponding batch-level decision trajectory. Figures 8 and 9 present the results of T5-large on the LS and SC benchmarks, respectively. In each figure, the upper panel shows the training loss along the se-quential data stream, and the lower panel shows the corresponding Reuse, Expand, and New decisions. Across both benchmarks, the decision trajectory follows the training dynamics in a meaningful yet nontrivial manner. When the incoming data be-come substantially less compatible with previously accumulated knowledge, the loss often rises and FiUni correspondingly activates New or Expand to introduce additional subspace capacity. By con-trast, when the stream remains relatively stable, the decisions are dominated by Reuse, meaning that the current batches can be effectively absorbed by existing Fisher subspaces. Such a pattern is particularly visible on the LS benchmark, where several major shifts in the stream are accompanied by noticeable changes in the loss curve and the appearance of newly allocated subspaces. At the same time, FiUni is not merely reacting to abrupt loss changes. Compared with methods that rely on sudden loss variation for task-boundary detection, FiUni operates at a finer batch-level gran-ularity through Fisher subspace matching. Conse-quently, its decision process is able to capture latent task transitions even when the loss curve does not exhibit a pronounced spike. For example, in the SC benchmark, the transitions from Amazon to Yahoo and from Yahoo to AG do not lead to particularly Shot_2  Shot_8  Shot_32 Figure 5: Ablation on the number of samples used for Fisher estimation. More samples lead to more stable Fisher subspaces and clearer separation between within-task and cross-task similarities. 

sharp loss peaks, yet FiUni still introduces new subspaces at the corresponding phases. A similar phenomenon appears in the LS benchmark, such as the transitions from Amazon to SST-2 and from AG to MultiRC, where the loss changes only mildly while the decision trajectory still detects the under-lying shift in task geometry. Another noteworthy characteristic is that FiUni does not simply replicate manually defined task boundaries. Some transitions are handled through Reuse or Expand rather than immediately opening a new subspace, especially when adjacent tasks remain geometrically related. Likewise, within a single human-defined task, FiUni may occasionally expand an existing subspace when the incoming batches reveal additional internal variation. This behavior is consistent with our notion of latent tasks: the model tracks its own perceived learning phases rather than mechanically following dataset-level segmentation. In addition, in the SC benchmark, we observe several Expand decisions within the DBpedia stage. Although DBpedia is treated as a single dataset-level task, it covers a wide range of entity cate-gories and topic types, which can induce noticeable batch-level variation in Fisher geometry. These batches may not be fully explained by the initial DBpedia subspace, but they remain related enough to avoid opening entirely new subspaces. FiUni therefore expands the existing subspace to provide additional capacity for intra-task variation while preserving knowledge reuse. The different be-havior of DBpedia in SC and LS further reflects the context-dependent nature of FiUni’s decisions. Rather than assigning a fixed decision pattern to each dataset, FiUni compares every incoming batch with the current historical Fisher subspace pool. In SC, DBpedia appears when the historical pool is still small, making its intra-task variation more likely to fall into the intermediate-similarity region and trigger Expand. In LS, however, DBpedia is en-countered after many previous tasks have already populated the subspace pool, so some DBpedia batches can be better explained by existing related subspaces and are thus handled through Reuse. This behavior further supports that FiUni tracks model-perceived latent learning phases rather than simply following dataset names or manually de-fined task boundaries. Taken together, the loss-decision analysis pro-vides an intuitive view of how FiUni manages subspaces throughout online continual adaptation. Module_{ q,k,v,o,wi,wo } Module_{ q,o } Module_{ q,k,v,o }Figure 6: Ablation on module selection for Fisher subspace similarity computation. Different module choices preserve similar task-level structures, showing that the similarity signal is not tied to a single module configuration. 

Large shifts in the stream are often accompanied by subspace creation or expansion, while stable pe-riods are mainly handled through knowledge reuse. More importantly, the decision mechanism is not limited to coarse signals derived from loss fluctua-tions, but can also resolve finer latent transitions at the batch level, which is especially valuable in re-alistic task-free settings where explicit task bound-aries are unavailable. 

D.3 Dynamic Trainable Parameter Analysis 

We further analyze the number of trainable param-eters from a dynamic perspective on the LS bench-mark with T5-large. Different from task-aware methods that typically allocate or optimize a fixed amount of adaptation parameters for each task, Fi-Uni adjusts its trainable parameter budget accord-ing to the online decision trajectory. Specifically, a Reuse decision does not introduce additional sub-space parameters, while Expand only increases the capacity of an existing subspace by a small amount. A New decision allocates a new LoRA subspace only when the incoming batch is geometrically dis-tinct from all historical subspaces. Therefore, the trainable parameter count of FiUni grows adap-tively with the data stream rather than linearly fol-lowing the number of manually defined tasks.       

> Metric O-LoRA SpaRTA FiUni (ours)
> Trainable Params 35.39M 44.24M 3.62M
> Table 7: Trainable parameter comparison on the LS benchmark. For FiUni, we report the dynamic trainable parameter count obtained on Order 4.

For comparison, according to the hyperparam-eter settings reported in prior work (Wang et al., 2023a; Liao et al., 2026), we compute the accumu-lated trainable parameters of O-LoRA and SpaRTA on T5-large, while for FiUni we directly count the dynamically allocated trainable parameters after training on Order 4. The comparison is summa-rized in Table 7. The results show that FiUni uses substantially fewer trainable parameters than the fixed task-level allocation adopted by strong task-aware baselines. Since FiUni only trains the core matrix within each Fisher-guided LoRA subspace, the trainable pa-rameter count is substantially reduced at the sub-space level. On top of this, the adaptive mechanism further helps control parameter growth: related batches can share existing subspaces, moderately shifted batches only expand the most relevant sub-space, and new subspaces are created only when Layer_0  Layer_11  Layer_all Figure 7: Ablation on layer selection for Fisher subspace similarity computation. The resulting similarity structures remain broadly consistent across different layer choices, supporting efficient detection with selected layers. 

necessary. As a result, FiUni avoids assigning a full set of adaptation parameters to every dataset-level task, while still preserving enough flexibility to han-dle distributional changes in the online stream. This adaptive parameter allocation is especially benefi-cial for long-sequence continual learning, where blindly adding a complete adapter for each task would lead to rapid parameter growth. Figure 8: Training loss and FiUni decision trajectory on the LS benchmark with T5-large. The upper panel shows the training loss along the online data stream, and the lower panel shows the corresponding batch-level Reuse ,

Expand , and New decisions. 

Figure 9: Training loss and FiUni decision trajectory on the SC benchmark with T5-large. Even when some task transitions do not produce obvious loss spikes, FiUni can still identify the corresponding latent shifts through Fisher subspace matching and trigger appropriate batch-level decisions.