Title: Progressive Content Refinement with Decaying Reward Joint LinUCB

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06750v1

Published Time: Mon, 10 Aug 2026 00:23:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# Progressive Content Refinement with Decaying Reward Joint LinUCB 

Shion Ishikawa 

Rakuten Group, Inc. Tokyo, Japan 

Pablo Loyola 

Rakuten Group, Inc. Tokyo, Japan 

Young-joo Chung 

Rakuten Group, Inc. San Mateo, USA 

Yun Ching Liu 

Rakuten Group, Inc. Tokyo, Japan 

Abstract 

Iterative refinement has significantly enhanced Large Language Model (LLM) performance; however, existing methods—ranging from feedback-based Self-Refine to traditional ban-dit approaches—often rely on static options or overlook the “saturation effect”. This neglect leads to over-exploitation, where the continu-ous use of identical prompts or arms results in diminishing rewards over time. To address this challenge, we propose a novel contextual bandit algorithm that explicitly in-corporates reward decay modeling. Utilizing an Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm, our method simultaneously estimates both arm-specific and decay parameters. Furthermore, by embedding prompts as arms, we facilitate the joint learning of arm values, distinguishing our approach from the traditional disjoint Lin-ear Upper Confidence Bound (LinUCB) frame-work. Experimental results on Sentiment Reversal and GSM8K benchmarks demonstrate that our method achieves significant performance gains over strong baselines. Finally, our ablation study confirms that the integration of reward decay modeling within the bandit framework is crucial for mitigating over-exploitation and optimizing the iterative refinement process. 

1 Introduction 

In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized the field of natural language processing, demonstrating remarkable performance across a wide array of tasks such as text genera-tion, summarization, translation, and complex rea-soning (Brown et al., 2020; Chung et al., 2024). To further unlock the full potential of these mod-els and obtain higher-quality, more reliable out-puts, iterative refinement techniques have become increasingly crucial (Madaan et al., 2023; Hein et al., 2025). These methods aim to systematically enhance LLM-generated content by applying suc-cessive improvements based on various feedback mechanisms. While initial iterative refinement approaches like Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2023) have shown promise by allowing LLMs to critique and improve their own outputs, they often rely on pre-defined or heuristically chosen refinement prompts. This static selection of prompts can lead to subopti-mal performance, as the effectiveness of a refine-ment strategy can vary significantly across different contexts and over time. More sophisticated meth-ods have begun to incorporate multi-armed bandit (MAB) frameworks. These frameworks treat dif-ferent refinement strategies (e.g., prompt design strategies, contents to refine) as "arms" to be pulled (Ashizawa et al., 2025; Tang et al., 2024). These bandit-based approaches effectively balance the ex-ploration of novel refinement strategies with the exploitation of known effective ones, optimizing the overall refinement process. However, a critical limitation in existing itera-tive refinement paradigms, particularly prevalent in bandit-based methods, is the implicit assumption of stationary reward distributions for each refinement strategy (arm). In reality, repeatedly applying the same refinement prompt or exploiting a single arm can lead to a "saturation effect." For instance, an LLM might quickly exhaust the utility of a specific grammatical correction prompt after a few itera-tions, or a mathematical reasoning prompt might become redundant once a certain level of accuracy is achieved. Continuing to apply such a prompt results in diminishing returns, or even negative im-pacts, akin to over-editing. Empirical evidence for this decay phenomenon is presented in Figure 4 of (Madaan et al., 2023). This phenomenon, termed "reward decay" by prior work like Rotting Ban-dit (Levine et al., 2017), leads to inefficient over-exploitation of diminishingly effective strategies, hindering overall refinement efficiency. Traditional 1arXiv:2608.06750v1 [cs.CL] 7 Aug 2026 bandit algorithms, designed for stationary environ-ments, fail to adequately capture and adapt to this dynamic decay in reward. While the concept of decaying rewards has been explored by Rotting Bandit, this approach suffers from inefficiencies due to their initial exploration strategies, such as relying on round-robin sampling to estimate decay rates. To address these fundamental challenges, we pro-pose a novel bandit algorithm that explicitly mod-els and adapts to the reward decay phenomenon in LLM iterative refinement. Furthermore, our ap-proach abstracts arms as embeddings, treating these as the context for each arm. Traditional LinUCB-like approaches (Li et al., 2010) often have arm features that are disjoint with each other (e.g., as-suming distinct arm models for how arm context affects click-through rates in sports and political news recommendations). In contrast, our method assumes a unified underlying model regarding how prompt embeddings influence rewards. This means that when a new prompt (arm) is generated, its em-bedding representation allows for a more informed initial estimation of its parameters, effectively miti-gating the LLM-specific “cold start” problem often encountered with new prompts. Finally, by introducing an Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm (Moon, 1996), we achieve simultaneous learning of both decay and contextual parameters, thereby circumventing the inefficient exploration phase associated with round-robin sampling in methods like Rotting Bandit. These techniques allow our system to dynami-cally balance exploration of potentially effective but less-used prompts with the exploitation of cur-rently high-performing prompts, while actively ac-counting for their diminishing utility over time. Our technical contributions are threefold: • We propose a novel bandit algorithm DR-LinUCB 1 that explicitly incorporates a re-ward decay model for each arm, enabling adaptive exploration-exploitation in dynamic LLM refinement environments. • We introduce a method to embed refinement prompts as contextual features for our ban-dit arms, enabling the joint learning of arm values. Unlike traditional disjoint LinUCB, 

> 1Source code attached for review. GitHub repository will be available at https://github.com/{anonymous_org} upon ac-ceptance.

our method assumes a unified arm model for each LLM task, which allows for a more in-formed initial estimation of parameters for new prompts, thereby mitigating the LLM-specific "cold start" problem. • We leverage an Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm for the simultaneous learning of both arm contextual parameters and their associated decay parameters from observed rewards. This approach avoids inefficient ini-tial exploration strategies such as round-robin sampling. 

> Figure 1: DR-LinUCB’s Progressive Content Refine-ment. This flowchart details its core components: re-ward decay modeling, UCB-based arm selection and joint EM-based parameter learning.

2 Related works 

2.1 Iterative Refinement for Large Language Models 

The ability of LLMs to perform iterative self-correction has emerged as a key technique for enhancing generation quality. SELF-REFINE (Madaan et al., 2023) introduced LLMs generat-ing, critiquing, and refining their own outputs using natural language feedback, significantly improving performance across tasks. This concept extended to specific domains: Chen et al. (2024) applied it to machine translation for human-preferred flu-ency (Chen et al., 2024) , and Hein et al. (2025) developed high-accuracy clinical information ex-traction pipelines, emphasizing task definition and human-in-the-loop refinement (Hein et al., 2025) . Despite these advances, a key limitation of existing methods is their limited prompt diversity, which our work mitigates through bandit explore-exploitation. 22.2 Bandit Algorithms for Large Language Model 

In multi-step tasks, LLMs need to balance using proven prompts (exploitation) with trying new ones (exploration). Bandit algorithms help by intelli-gently guiding this choice, preventing over-reliance on old prompts and efficiently discovering better ones. In code refinement, the REx (REfine, Explore, Exploit) algorithm (Tang et al., 2024) frames iter-ative LLM-based code repair as an arm-acquiring bandit problem. Each generated code is an arm, and refining it yields a reward (passing tests). REx uses Thompson Sampling with heuristic-informed priors to balance exploring new code and exploiting promising ones. It significantly improved problem-solving and reduced LLM calls across diverse cod-ing tasks. For prompt optimization, OPTS (Optimizing Prompts with sTrategy Selection) (Ashizawa et al., 2025) explicitly selects prompt design strategies using bandit algorithms. Traditional methods of-ten rely on LLMs implicitly choosing strategies, which can be suboptimal. OPTS(TS), its most ef-fective variant, treats each strategy as an arm, learn-ing its efficacy via Thompson Sampling (Thomp-son, 1933). This approach improved prompt perfor-mance by up to 50% by making strategy selection adaptive and data-driven. Unlike REx and OPTS, which respectively refine content candidates with a fixed prompt and opti-mize a single prompt, our approach dynamically selects generated prompts. This enables prompt selection to be adapted based on the current output state, allowing for contextual content refinement. 

2.3 Bandit Algorithms with Decaying Rewards 

The "Rotting Bandits" framework (Levine et al., 2017) addresses Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) prob-lems where an arm’s expected reward decays with its pull count, departing from classical stationary assumptions. They proposed non-parametric meth-ods like Sliding-Window Average and parametric approaches such as Closest To Origin for this set-ting. However, their reliance on initial round-robin exploration for decay rate estimation can be ineffi-cient. Our work enhances this by introducing an Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm, en-abling simultaneous learning of decay and contex-tual parameters, thus circumventing the inefficient initial exploration inherent in traditional Rotting Bandit approaches. 

2.4 Action embeddings 

Large action spaces demand efficiency and scal-ability. action embeddings schemes address this by simplifying action representations. Action em-bedding is vital for Off-Policy Evaluation (OPE). Marginalized IPS (MIPS) (Saito and Joachims, 2022) uses embeddings to reduce OPE variance in large action spaces, enhancing generalizability. Furthermore, action embeddings are useful in posi-tion bias estimation (Ishikawa et al., 2024). Our work applies action embeddings for effi-ciency in large LLM prompt spaces. Further, using action embeddings within an arm-acquiring bandit framework, we enable adaptation to new “arms” (e.g., novel prompt strategies), facilitating robust LLM optimization. 

3 Problem Setting 

We consider an arm-acquiring contextual bandit problem with decaying rewards, where an agent’s objective is to maximize cumulative reward over 

Tmax timesteps. At each timestep t, an agent selects an arm i(t) from the available set At according to a policy π. Each arm i ∈ A t is characterized by a d-dimensional embedding ei ∈ Rd. We assume these arm embeddings lie within a compact subset of Rd,for example, a unit sphere or a hypercube. The set of available arms At can dynamically expand over time ( At+1 ⊇ A t) with arm acquisition. Upon selection, the agent observes a real-valued reward 

rt ∈ [0 , R max ] for some Rmax > 0.The observed reward r for arm i, after being pulled Ni times, follows an exponentially decaying model: 

r = ˜ μi · exp( −Ni · fi) (1) where ˜μi = e⊤ 

> i

θ is the initial expected reward (lin-early modeled by a global parameter θ ∈ Rd), and 

fi = max(0 , e⊤ 

> i

wf ) is the decay rate (determined by a global decay parameter wf ∈ Rd). The agent’s ultimate objective is to find a policy 

π that maximizes the cumulative reward PTmax  

> t=1

rt,equivalent to minimizing the cumulative regret 

R(Tmax ):

R(Tmax ) = 

> Tmax

X

> t=1

(r∗ 

> t

− rt) (2) 3Here, r∗ 

> t

denotes the reward from an oracle select-ing the optimal arm at timestep t considering its current decay. 

4 Decaying Reward Joint LinUCB (DR-LinUCB) 

DR-LinUCB is the core arm selection and parame-ter learning algorithm. It integrates a reward decay model and an EM algorithm into a joint linear UCB framework, where parameters are shared or learned across arms through their embeddings. Pseudo al-gorithm of DR-LinUCB is given by Algorithm 1. DR-LinUCB consists of several key elements, detailed below sections. 

4.0.1 UCB Selection with Reward Decay 

At each timestep t, DR-LinUCB selects an arm 

i(t) ∈ A t from the available arms that maximizes the following criterion: 

i(t) = argmax i∈[Kt]



e⊤ 

> i

ˆθ + C

q

e⊤ 

> i

A−1ei



· di

(3) where di = exp  −Ni max(0 , e⊤ 

> i

wf ).The first term, e⊤ 

> i

ˆθ, represents the estimated un-decayed expected reward for arm i, based on its embedding ei and the globally learned parameter 

ˆθ. The second term, C

q

e⊤ 

> i

A−1ei, is the explo-ration term (UCB term) that accounts for uncer-tainty, where C is a hyperparameter controlling the degree of exploration. Finally, the exponen-tial term, exp  −Ni max(0 , e⊤ 

> i

wf ), models the decay of reward based on the number of times arm 

i has been pulled, Ni, and its specific decay rate 

e⊤ 

> i

wf . The max(0 , ·) operation ensures the decay factor is non-negative. This comprehensive crite-rion considers the saturation effect from excessive exploitation, thereby encouraging the algorithm to explore new arms when existing ones show dimin-ishing returns. 

4.0.2 Expectation-Maximization (EM) Algorithm for Parameter Learning 

DR-LinUCB employs an EM algorithm to simul-taneously learn both the global reward model pa-rameters ˆθ and the global decay model parameters 

wf . This approach is particularly effective for esti-mating the hidden variable, the undecayed reward 

˜μi(t), from the observed decayed reward rt.

Algorithm 1 Decaying Reward Joint LinUCB (DR-LinUCB) 

Require: A0, h 0, T max , C, λ, λ f , ϵ log , ϵ decay  

> 1:

Initialize: Ni = 0 for i ∈ A 0 

> 2:

A = λId, b = 0d, ˆθ = 0d 

> 3:

Af = λf Id, bf = 0d, wf = 0d 

> 4:

for t = 1 , 2, . . . , T max do  

> 5:

At ← A t−1 ∪ ArmGenerator (At−1, h t−1) 

> 6:

E ← { Embed (a) | a ∈ A t} 

> 7:

di = exp  −Ni max(0 , e⊤ 

> i

wf ) 

> 8:

i(t) ← argmax i∈A t (e⊤ 

> i

ˆθ +

C

q

e⊤ 

> i

A−1ei) · di 

> 9:

Observe reward rt for arm i(t) 

> 10:

while ˆθ, wf not converged do  

> 11:

˜μi(t) ← rt/d i(t) 

> 12:

ˆθ ← (A + ei(t)e⊤

> i(t)

)−1(b + ˜ μi(t)ei(t)) 

> 13:

if rt > 0 and ˜μi(t) > 0 and rt̸ = ˜ μi(t)

then  

> 14:

y ← log(˜ μi(t) + ϵlog ) − log( rt +

ϵlog ) 

> 15:

x ← Ni(t)ei(t) 

> 16:

wf ← (Af + x(x)⊤)−1(bf + yx) 

> 17:

end if  

> 18:

end while  

> 19:

A ← A + ei(t)e⊤ 

> i(t)
> 20:

b ← b + ˜ μi(t)ei(t) 

> 21:

Af ← Af + x(x)⊤ 

> 22:

bf ← bf + yx 

> 23:

ht ← ht−1 ∪ { i(t), r t} 

> 24:

Ni(t) ← Ni(t) + 1  

> 25:

end for 

The E-Step (Line 11) uses the current global decay model parameters wf to undecay the ob-served reward rt, thereby estimating the undecayed reward ˜μi(t). The calculation is performed as 

˜μi(t) ← rt/ exp 



−Ni(t) · max(0 , e⊤

> i(t)

wf )



. Asmall constant ϵdecay is introduced for numerical stability, treating the decay rate as 1 if it’s very small. The M-Step (Lines 12-16) then updates the global reward model parameters ˆθ and the global decay model parameters wf using the ˜μi(t) esti-mated in the E-Step. Specifically, ˆθ is updated using standard linear ridge regression, with the un-decayed reward ˜μi(t) as the target: ˆθ ← (A +

ei(t)e⊤

> i(t)

)−1(b + ˜ μi(t) · ei(t)). The decay model parameters wf are updated by transforming the ex-ponential decay into a linear regression problem, a process detailed in the subsequent subsection. 4Transformation to a Linear Regression Problem for wf Estimation 

To estimate the global decay parameter wf ,the exponential decay model rt = ˜μi(t) ·

exp 



−Ni(t) · (e⊤

> i(t)

wf )



is transformed into a lin-ear regression problem. Taking the natural loga-rithm of both sides yields: 

log( rt) = log(˜ μi(t)) − Ni(t) · (e⊤

> i(t)

wf )log(˜ μi(t)) − log( rt) = Ni(t) · (e⊤

> i(t)

wf ) (4) Rearranging this equation, we define the target variable y′ and feature vector x′ for a linear regres-sion of the form y′ = x′⊤ wf :

y′ = log(˜ μi(t) + ϵlog ) − log( rt + ϵlog )

x′ =Ni(t) · ei(t) (5) Here, for numerical stability in computation, we introduce a small positive constant ϵlog ≪ rt, ˜μi(t),preventing issues with log(0) .The online update of wf proceeds as follows. First, a crucial condition is checked in Line 15: ‘If 

rt > 0 and ˜μi(t) > 0 and rt̸ = ˜ μi(t) then‘. This ensures that logarithmic transformation is valid and that actual decay has occurred, making the update meaningful. If the conditions are met, y′ and x′ are com-puted using the formulas in Equations (5). Then we update the global decay parameter wf through a standard online ridge regression framework (Line 16). After the loop of EM algorithm, sufficient statistics A, Af b and bf are updated (Lines 19-23), utilizing the closed-form solutions for online ridge regression (Li et al., 2010). 

Application to Progressive Content Refinement 

In the preceding sections, we introduced DR-LinUCB, a versatile bandit algorithm designed for dynamic environments where rewards decay, and both arm context and decay parameters are learned using an EM algorithm. Now, we will demonstrate how this general algorithmic framework can be specifically applied to enhance LLMs through pro-gressive content refinement. We represent an LLM task as a tuple 

(pinit , Evaluator ()) , where pinit is the original prompt that defines the LLM’s primary objec-tive (e.g., "Summarize the following article"), and Evaluator () is a function that quantifies the quality or utility of the LLM’s output ( yt) in response to a given prompt. To apply DR-LinUCB to LLM tasks, each re-finement prompt is treated as an "arm" within its framework. The process initializes A0 with pinit . In each step, the ArmGenerator function (Algorithm 2) expands the set of available arms. 

Algorithm 2 ArmGenerator for Content Refine-ment  

> 1:

function ARM GENERATOR (At−1, h t−1) 

> 2:

if t > 1 then ht−1 ← ht−1 ∪ { yt−1} 

> 3:

else return {}  

> 4:

end if  

> 5:

pfeedback ← LLM (ht−1) 

> 6:

pnew ← LLM (pinit , p feedback , h t−1) 

> 7:

return {pnew } 

> 8:

end function 

This function leverages the LLM to generate a feedback prompt pfeedback from the history ht−1,and then generate a new refinement prompt pnew 

based on pinit , pfeedback , and ht−1. This self-refinement process draws inspiration from (Madaan et al., 2023). Additionally, we introduce an EvoArmGener-ator that employs EvoPrompt (Guo et al., 2025) as a variant of arm generator. This evolutionary algorithm-based strategy explores a broader, more diverse set of refinement prompts. While self-refinement generation can converge to local optima, evolutionary algorithms excel at systematic explo-ration of wider solution spaces through mutation and crossover. This diversity is crucial for ablation studies comparing DR-LinUCB’s learning-based selection against simpler strategies like random se-lection, especially when a rich pool of diverse arms is needed. In Algorithm 1, the step for "Observe reward 

rt" works as follows: First, the chosen prompt, 

i(t), is given to the LLM, which then generates an output, yt. The reward rt is subsequently cal-culated by feeding this output yt into the task’s predefined Evaluator () function, resulting in rt ←

Evaluator (yt). These steps enable the application of the DR-LinUCB framework to LLM tasks for progressive content refinement. 

Prompt Embedding 

To leverage our refinement prompts as arms within the DR-LinUCB framework, we employ a prompt 5embedding strategy. We begin by utilizing a fine-tuned MINILM (Wang et al., 2020) model 2 to transform prompts into a high-dimensional embed-ding space. Then, we embed 200 prompts from the ‘awesome-chatgpt-prompts‘ 3 dataset into this space. Following this, we apply Principal Com-ponent Analysis (PCA) (Ma´ ckiewicz and Rata-jczak, 1993) to these embeddings to reduce their dimensionality, obtaining a 5-dimensional princi-pal component vector. In this research, we leverage this fine-tuned sentence transformer model and the trained PCA model to embed new prompts and compress their dimensions before use in our bandit algorithm. 

5 Evaluation 

We study two different domains that each involve complex natural language reasoning and genera-tion. 1. Math Reasoning : GSM8K (Grade School Math 8k) (Cobbe et al., 2021) is a challenging dataset of elementary-level math word prob-lems. The task is to read a natural-language problem description and generate a step-by-step solution, involving numerical calcula-tions and logical reasoning, to find the final numerical answer. It assesses a model’s multi-step mathematical reasoning and its ability to convert linguistic information into a solvable procedure. As a metric, we report the average success rate. A "success" is defined as generating the exact numerical answer defined in the dataset. 2. Sentiment Reversal : Sentiment Reversal is a long-form text style transfer task (Madaan et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2015). Given a text passage with a specific sentiment (e.g., neg-ative), the goal is to rewrite the entire pas-sage to a target sentiment (e.g., very positive), not merely reversing it. This task evaluates a model’s ability for fine-grained content edit-ing, requiring not only a complete shift in emotional tone but also an adjustment of sen-timent intensity. It necessitates understand-ing the original meaning and tone, and then systematically altering vocabulary, phrasing, 

> 2https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/ all-MiniLM-L6-v2
> 3https://huggingface.co/datasets/fka/ awesome-chatgpt-prompts

and narrative to achieve the specified oppos-ing sentiment and intensity while maintaining coherence. As a metric, we report the average scores. We first calculate the sentiment using a ModernBert-based Multilingual Sentiment Classification Model (tabularisai et al., 2025). If the predicted sentiment matches the target sentiment, a score of 1.0 is assigned. Other-wise, we employ an LLM as a judge to calcu-late a score reflecting the alignment of the gen-erated text’s sentiment to the target. The LLM model version used for judging in each exper-iment matches the version employed within that experiment. We use these tasks to study following research questions: 

RQ1: Can iterative-refinement achieve higher per-formance than a single-call strategy? 

RQ2: Can reward decay reduce over-exploitation and contribute to total performance? 

RQ3: Does reward decay accelerate the conver-gence and performance improvement of iterative refinement? 

RQ4: Which approach provides better perfor-mance: ArmGenerator or EvoArmGenerator? 

RQ5: Does the combination of joint LinUCB and reward decay achieve superior overall perfor-mance? To investigate these questions, we study a range of baselines: • Single Call : LLM output from initial prompt only. Serves as a performance lower bound. • Random Exploration : Uses EvoArmGenera-tor but selects prompts uniformly at random. Evaluates the benefit of learning over pure exploration. • JointLinUCB : Uses EvoArmGenerator and LinUCB for prompt selection, but assumes stationary rewards, lacking decay modeling. Isolates decay’s contribution. • EvoLinUCB : This is a variant of the DR-LinUCB method that uses EvoArmGenerator .This approach offers diverse prompt genera-tion, but unlike the ArmGenerator , it does not use LLM feedback during generation. • Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2023): Iterative refinement where LLM generates feedback 6Model Task Algorithm ChatGPT3.5-turbo ChatGPT4o GSM8K 

Single Call 0.187 ± 0.059 0.537 ± 0.055 

Random Exploration 0.310 ± 0.035 0.647 ± 0.049 

JointLinUCB 0.323 ± 0.053 0.610 ± 0.061 

EvoLinUCB 0.340 ± 0.053 0.630 ± 0.087 

Self-Refine 0.687 ± 0.075 0.913 ± 0.021 

REx 0.530 ± 0.017 0.880 ± 0.010 

DR-LinUCB(Ours) 0.790 ± 0.035 0.900 ± 0.010 

Sentiment Inverse 

Single Call 0.839 ± 0.015 0.950 ± 0.016 

Random Exploration 0.935 ± 0.028 0.980 ± 0.008 

JointLinUCB 0.922 ± 0.010 0.973 ± 0.013 

EvoLinUCB 0.944 ± 0.014 0.984 ± 0.002 

Self-Refine 0.879 ± 0.009 0.989 ± 0.004 

REx 0.931 ± 0.005 0.985 ± 0.008 

DR-LinUCB(Ours) 0.952 ± 0.009 1.000 ± 0.000   

> Table 1: Performance summary (mean ±standard deviation) for each task, algorithm, and model. Metrics are defined in Section 5.

and prompts. The prompt selection is greedy, typically choosing the latest generated prompt without adaptive learning. This corresponds to repeated ArmGenerator use without sophis-ticated selection. • REx (REfine, Explore, Exploit) (Tang et al., 2024): Uses Thompson Sampling for content refinement. The refinement prompt is fixed, unlike our dynamic prompt selection. For each experiment, we evaluated the models on 100 distinct samples for each of three random seeds. The reported results are averaged over these three independent runs, effectively evaluating per-formance on a total of 300 samples for each task and algorithm. For each sample, algorithm has up to six time steps. 

The Value of Iterative LLM Interaction 

The comparison between Single Call and Random Exploration in Table 1 demonstrates that multi-step iterative processes significantly enhance per-formance. The Single Call baseline consistently yields the lowest scores. For instance, in GSM8K with ChatGPT3.5-turbo, Single Call scored 0.187. In contrast, Random Exploration shows a substantial improvement. For the same task, "Random Ex-ploration" achieves 0.310, an approximate 65% in-crease over Single Call. This clearly indicates that engaging the LLM in a multi-step iterative process leads to significant performance improvement over a single-shot ap-proach. This observation answers RQ1, confirming that iterative LLM usage, even in its most basic form, yields higher performance than a single call strategy. It underscores the fundamental value of employing LLMs iteratively to refine and optimize their outputs. 

DR-LinUCB Outperforms Baselines and SOTA 

The results in Table 1 demonstrates that our pro-posed DR-LinUCB consistently achieves superior performance against both our ablation study base-lines and state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods like Self-Refine and REx. Specifically, with ChatGPT3.5-turbo, DR-LinUCB leads in both GSM8K ( 0.790 ) and Senti-ment Inverse ( 0.952 ), significantly surpassing Self-Refine ( 0.687 for GSM8K, 0.879 for Sentiment In-verse) and REx ( 0.530 for GSM8K, 0.931 for Senti-ment Inverse). This highlights DR-LinUCB’s capa-bility in enhancing less powerful LLMs. With Chat-GPT4o, DR-LinUCB achieves 0.900 for GSM8K, outperforming REx ( 0.880 ) and closely trailing Self-Refine ( 0.913 ). In particular, for Sentiment Inverse with ChatGPT4o, DR-LinUCB achieves a perfect score of 1.000 , outperforming all other methods. We further discuss the feasibility and implications of this perfect score in Section 6. 7These results unequivocally answer RQ5. The in-tegration of these mechanisms allows DR-LinUCB to effectively learn optimal prompt arms while pre-venting over-exploitation, leading to robust and often best-in-class performance. 

> Figure 2: History of average scores in the Sentiment Re-versal Task for ChatGPT-3.5 Turbo (top) and ChatGPT-4o (bottom). EvoLinUCB incorporates both arm decay and arm learning, while JointLinUCB only features arm learning. Random Exploration uniformly selects arms generated by EvoArmGenerator. Only instances not cor-rectly answered in the first attempt are included, allow-ing for a comparison of iterative improvement effects. The shaded area indicates the standard error from three experimental runs.

Addressing RQ2 and RQ3: Insights from Algorithmic Component Analysis 

To ensure consistent conditions for prompt gen-eration, our comparison focuses on three models that utilize the EvoPrompt Generator. Furthermore, only instances answered incorrectly in the first at-tempt are included to allow a comparison of itera-tive improvement effects. As depicted in Figure 2, all three algorithms show comparable improvements up to the second iteration. However, from the third iteration on-wards, EvoLinUCB consistently outperforms the others for both ChatGPT-3.5 Turbo and ChatGPT-4o. This superior performance of EvoLinUCB can be attributed to its incorporation of both reward decay and arm learning. In particular, JointLinUCB performs worse than Random Exploration in the case of ChatGPT-4o. This observation supports our hypothesis that mech-anisms preventing over-exploitation, like EvoLin-UCB’s decay or Random Exploration, improve ef-fectiveness over solely exploiting estimated "good" arms. This finding directly addresses RQ2, indi-cating that reward decay effectively mitigates over-exploitation, leading to enhanced performance. Moreover, by observing the score history, we can see that the scores converge relatively quickly. This rapid convergence provides an answer to RQ3, suggesting that effective improvements can be achieved within a limited number of iterative steps. 

Suitability of Arm Generation Approaches 

DR-LinUCB (with ArmGenerator ) significantly outperforms EvoLinUCB in Sentiment Inverse (0.952 vs. 0.944 with GPT-3.5) and achieves a sub-stantial gain in GSM8K over JointLinUCB ( 0.790 

vs. 0.323 ). These results suggest that feedback-driven prompt exploration is generally more effec-tive than evolutionary modification. However, this effectiveness is task-dependent; while Self-Refine excels in GSM8K with GPT-4o ( 0.913 ), it underperforms JointLinUCB in Sen-timent Inverse, likely because iterative correc-tion can introduce noise or suboptimal steering in simpler tasks. We conclude that ArmGenerator 

is most robust when integrated with exploration-exploitation strategies. 

6 Conclusion 

This paper introduces Decaying Reward Joint Lin-UCB (DR-LinUCB), a novel bandit algorithm de-signed for iterative LLM content refinement. DR-LinUCB explicitly models the "saturation effect" through reward decay and jointly learns contex-tual and decay parameters. Our experiments on GSM8K and Sentiment Reversal tasks demonstrate DR-LinUCB’s superior performance compared to various baselines and state-of-the-art methods. We confirmed that incorporating reward decay effec-tively prevents over-exploitation, leading to en-hanced performance and accelerated convergence. DR-LinUCB offers a significant advancement in optimizing LLM iterative refinement, providing a principled approach to balance exploration and exploitation in dynamic environments where the utility of refinement strategies can diminish over time. 87 Limitations 

While our proposed DR-LinUCB framework shows promising results, several limitations remain to be addressed in future work. 

Feasibility of Score 1.0 in Sentiment Rever-sal Task Historically, LLMs have struggled to achieve 100% accuracy on simple tasks, largely due to inherent flaws in existing benchmarks. The Platinum benchmark (Vendrow et al., 2025) demon-strates that many benchmarks contain significant er-rors; for instance, in SVAMP (Patel et al., 2021), a question was mislabeled with an incorrect solution. In contrast, our sentiment reversal task evaluates performance using a pretrained sentiment analysis model and an LLM judge, effectively eliminating the issue of mislabeled ground truth. While the task is relatively simple—with even the Self-Refine model achieving a high score of 0.989—the fact that 100% accuracy is achievable aligns with the findings of the Platinum Bench-marks paper regarding carefully curated tasks. However, it remains a limitation that our current evaluation is focused on this feasible task, and further validation on more complex benchmarks where 100% accuracy is not yet reachable is re-quired. 

Minimizing Cost of LLM Interactions The it-erative nature of our approach, combined with mul-tiple LLM calls for ArmGenerator and reward eval-uation within each timestep, can lead to significant computational overhead and increased API costs. In real-world, high-throughput scenarios, the la-tency and expenses associated with these repeated inferences could be limiting factors. While our re-ward decay model implicitly helps minimize unnec-essary calls by discouraging the over-exploitation of ineffective prompts, the framework is not yet ex-plicitly optimized for this purpose. Future research should investigate how to leverage decay model-ing more strategically to reduce the total number of LLM interactions required, improving overall cost-effectiveness. 

Sensitivity to Hyperparameters Like many ban-dit algorithms, DR-LinUCB relies on hyperparam-eters such as C, λ, λf , ϵlog , and ϵdecay . The per-formance of the algorithm can be sensitive to the tuning of these parameters. While we have iden-tified effective settings for our specific tasks, op-timal tuning for diverse LLM applications might require extensive experimentation. The develop-ment of adaptive or self-tuning mechanisms for these hyperparameters remains an important direc-tion to enhance the robustness and ease of use of DR-LinUCB. 

References                 

> Rin Ashizawa, Yoichi Hirose, Nozomu Yoshinari, Kento Uchida, and Shinichi Shirakawa. 2025. Bandit-based prompt design strategy selection improves prompt op-timizers. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 20799–20817, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, and et al. Ryder. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 33, pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc. Pinzhen Chen, Zhicheng Guo, Barry Haddow, and Ken-neth Heafield. 2024. Iterative translation refinement with large language models. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference of the European Association for Machine Translation (Volume 1) , pages 181–190, Sheffield, UK. European Association for Machine Translation (EAMT). Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, and et al. Longpre. 2024. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 25(1). Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. 2021. Training verifiers to solve math word prob-lems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168 .Qingyan Guo, Rui Wang, Junliang Guo, Bei Li, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Guoqing Liu, Jiang Bian, and Yu-jiu Yang. 2025. Evoprompt: Connecting llms with evolutionary algorithms yields powerful prompt opti-mizers. Preprint , arXiv:2309.08532. David Hein, Alana Christie, Michael Holcomb, Bingqing Xie, AJ Jain, Joseph Vento, Neil Rakheja, Ameer Hamza Shakur, Scott Christley, Lindsay G. Cowell, James Brugarolas, Andrew R. Jamieson, and Payal Kapur. 2025. Iterative refinement and goal articulation to optimize large language models for clinical information extraction. npj Digital Medicine ,8(1):301. Shion Ishikawa, Yun Ching Liu, Young-Joo Chung, and Yu Hirate. 2024. Position bias estimation with item embedding for sparse dataset. In Companion Pro-ceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024 , WWW ’24, page 895–898, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery.

9Nir Levine, Koby Crammer, and Shie Mannor. 2017. Rotting bandits. In Proceedings of the 31st Interna-tional Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS’17, page 3077–3086, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Lihong Li, Wei Chu, John Langford, and Robert E. Schapire. 2010. A contextual-bandit approach to per-sonalized news article recommendation. In Proceed-ings of the 19th International Conference on World Wide Web , WWW ’10, page 661–670, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, and et al. Gupta. 2023. Self-refine: iterative refinement with self-feedback. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’23, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Andrzej Ma´ ckiewicz and Waldemar Ratajczak. 1993. Principal components analysis (pca). Computers & Geosciences , 19(3):303–342. T.K. Moon. 1996. The expectation-maximization algo-rithm. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , 13(6):47– 60. Arkil Patel, Satwik Bhattamishra, and Navin Goyal. 2021. Are NLP models really able to solve simple math word problems? In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 2080–2094, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yuta Saito and Thorsten Joachims. 2022. Off-policy evaluation for large action spaces via embeddings. 

Preprint , arXiv:2202.06317. tabularisai, Samuel Gyamfi, Vadim Borisov, and Richard H. Schreiber. 2025. multilingual-sentiment-analysis (revision 69afb83). Hao Tang, Keya Hu, Jin Peng Zhou, Sicheng Zhong, Wei-Long Zheng, Xujie Si, and Kevin Ellis. 2024. Code repair with llms gives an exploration-exploitation tradeoff. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , NIPS ’24, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. William R. Thompson. 1933. On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another in view of the evidence of two samples. Biometrika , 25(3/4):285– 294. Joshua Vendrow, Edward Vendrow, Sara Beery, and Aleksander Madry. 2025. Do large language model benchmarks test reliability? Preprint ,arXiv:2502.03461. Wenhui Wang, Furu Wei, Li Dong, Hangbo Bao, Nan Yang, and Ming Zhou. 2020. Minilm: deep self-attention distillation for task-agnostic compression of pre-trained transformers. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’20, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. 2015. Character-level convolutional networks for text clas-sification. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-tems - Volume 1 , NIPS’15, page 649–657, Cambridge, MA, USA. MIT Press. 

8 Appendix 

8.1 Implementation Details 

This appendix provides a comprehensive overview of the experimental setup and specific hyperparam-eter configurations used in our study to ensure re-producibility. 

8.1.1 Hardware and Software Environment 

All experiments were conducted on a MacBook Pro (13-inch, 2020) equipped with a 1.7 GHz Quad-Core Intel Core i7 processor, Intel Iris Plus Graph-ics 645 (1536 MB), and 16 GB of 2133 MHz LPDDR3 memory. For the LLM interactions, we used OpenAI’s API and client library. 

8.1.2 Hyperparameters 

The specific hyperparameters used for each algo-rithm are detailed below. • DR-LinUCB: For the DR-LinUCB algorithm, we set the maximum number of iterations to max_itr=5 , and the early stopping score to early_stop_score=1.0 .The number of it-erations for parameter learning was T_em=2 .The dimension of the context vector was 

d_dim=5 , and the constant for the confidence bound was C_constant=0.5 . Regularization parameters were set to lambda_theta=0.1 

and lambda_wf=0.1 . Small epsilon val-ues for logarithmic and decay calcula-tions were epsilon_log_val= 1 × 10 −6 and 

epsilon_decay_val= 1 × 10 −6 respectively. • Rex: The Rex algorithm utilized a con-fidence parameter C=20.0 , a maximum of 

max_llm_calls=5 to the LLM, and an early stopping score of early_stop_score=1.0 .• Self-Refine: For the Self-Refine process, we configured max_iterations=5 and an 

early_stop_score=1 .10 8.2 Prompts 8.2.1 GSM8K 

For the GSM8K (Grade School Math 8K) task, we employ a similar multi-stage prompting framework designed to enhance the accuracy and robustness of problem-solving. This framework consists of an initial generation prompt, a feedback genera-tion prompt, and a refinement prompt, iteratively improving the mathematical reasoning. 

8.2.2 Initial Problem Solving Prompt 

The first stage aims to generate an initial solution to the mathematical word problem. The prompt guides the LLM to provide a detailed Chain-of-Thought (CoT) before stating the final answer: 

Listing 1: Initial Problem Solving Prompt 

> Solve the following mathematical word problem. Output the final answer only after showing your detailed step-by-step reasoning (Chain-of-Thought). Question: {question} Answer:

This prompt instructs the LLM to solve the given ‘question‘ by first producing a step-by-step reason-ing process, followed by the final numerical an-swer. 

8.2.3 Feedback Generation Prompt 

After the initial solution attempt, a critical feedback stage is introduced. This prompt directs the LLM to act as a reviewer, identifying potential issues in the generated reasoning without revealing the correct answer: 

Listing 2: Feedback Generation Prompt 

> Review the given mathematical word problem and the current reasoning/answer. Provide detailed, step-by-step feedback focused on identifying potential calculation errors, logical flaws, or misinterpretations of the question. Do not state the final answer. Current reasoning/answer:

The LLM is tasked with providing constructive feedback on the ‘current reasoning/answer‘, specif-ically looking for ‘calculation errors‘, ‘logical flaws‘, or ‘misinterpretations‘ of the problem. A crucial directive is to ‘not state the final answer‘, ensuring the feedback mechanism does not directly provide the solution. Refinement Prompt The refinement stage utilizes the generated feedback and the history of previous attempts to iteratively improve the solution. This prompt is designed to guide the LLM towards a correct and well-structured answer: 

Listing 3: Refinement Prompt 

> **[Refinement Task: Math Word Problem (GSM8K)]** **Question:** {question} Review the provided question, the previous attempts at solving it, and the detailed feedback history. Your task is to **refine the entire reasoning chain and the final answer**. **Refinement Directives:** * **Calculation Accuracy:** Strictly re-check every arithmetic step. Identify and correct any calculation errors (miscounts, incorrect multiplication/division, etc.). * **Logical Consistency:** Verify the logical flow of the Chain-of-Thought (CoT). Ensure each step is derived correctly from the previous one and aligns with the question’s premise. * **Answer Format:** After the refined step-by-step reasoning, output the final numerical answer clearly. The final output must conclude with the phrase: **’The final answer is [NUMBER]’**. **History of Attempts and Feedback:** ---{history} ---**Refined Reasoning and Final Answer:**

This comprehensive refinement prompt explicitly defines the task as ‘[Refinement Task: Math Word Problem (GSM8K)]‘ and provides specific ‘Re-finement Directives‘. These directives guide the LLM to focus on ‘Calculation Accuracy‘, ‘Logi-cal Consistency‘ of the Chain-of-Thought (CoT), and ‘Answer Format‘. It emphasizes the need to re-check all arithmetic steps and ensure the logical flow aligns with the ‘question‘’s premise. Crucially, it mandates a specific output format for the final answer: ’The final answer is [NUMBER]’ . The prompt also incorporates a ‘History of Attempts and Feedback‘, allowing the LLM to learn from past errors and improve its reasoning iteratively. 

8.2.4 Sentiment Reversal 

Our approach to sentiment reversal leverages a multi-stage prompting strategy with a Large Lan-guage Model (LLM). This strategy involves an ini-tial sentiment inversion prompt, a feedback genera-tion prompt, and a refinement prompt, designed to iteratively improve the quality and accuracy of the inverted review. 11 8.2.5 Initial Sentiment Inversion Prompt 

The first stage involves generating an initial in-verted review. The prompt is structured to clearly instruct the LLM on the primary task: 

Listing 4: Initial Sentiment Inversion Prompt 

> Invert the sentiment of the following review. Original Review: {original_review_text} Inverted Review:

This prompt directly asks the LLM to per-form the sentiment reversal on the provided 

original_review_text and to output the 

Inverted Review .

8.2.6 Feedback Generation Prompt 

Following the initial inversion, a feedback mecha-nism is employed to evaluate the generated inverted review. This feedback is crucial for guiding sub-sequent refinements. The prompt for generating feedback is as follows: 

Listing 5: Feedback Generation Prompt 

> Review the given original review ({ original_review_text}...) and the current inverted review. Provide concrete suggestions for improvement, focusing on whether the sentiment is properly inverted and if the expression is natural. Consider the Original Sentiment: { original_sentiment} and the Target Sentiment : {target\_sentiment}. Current inverted review:

This prompt instructs the LLM to act as a critic, providing constructive feedback. It explicitly asks for suggestions focusing on sentiment inversion accuracy and naturalness of expression, taking into account the original_sentiment and the desired 

target_sentiment .

8.2.7 Refinement Prompt 

The final stage utilizes the feedback to refine the in-verted review. This iterative refinement process aims to converge on a high-quality, sentiment-inverted text. The refinement prompt is designed to guide the LLM through this process: 

Listing 6: Refinement Prompt 

> Please return only inverted reviews and don’t return suggestions. For the task of inverting the sentiment of the Original Review: {original\_review\_text }..., refine the review based on the history of previous inverted reviews and feedback. Consider all provided feedback and ensure the refined text has a {target\_sentiment} sentiment. Current sentiment is {self.sentiment}. if sentiment is not enough (e.g., target is very positive is current is positive), change sentiment polarity and change Intensifiers / Amplifiers Please consider current history:

This prompt emphasizes that the LLM should only output the refined inverted review, without addi-tional suggestions. It directs the LLM to leverage the history of previous inverted reviews and feedback to ensure the refined text aligns with the target_sentiment . It also provides explicit instructions for cases where the current sentiment is not sufficiently strong, suggesting the modification of sentiment polarity and the use of intensifiers/am-plifiers, thereby promoting more robust sentiment manipulation. The prompt also implicitly refer-ences an internal self.sentiment variable and encourages consideration of the current history 

of refinements. 

8.2.8 Prompts for generating arms 8.2.9 EvoArmGenerator 

This meta-prompt guides the Large Language Model (LLM) to perform evolutionary operations (mutation and crossover) on a target prompt. It leverages information from three "donor" prompts and an experimental history to create a refined prompt. The process is designed to optimize exist-ing prompts while preserving their core objective. 

Listing 7: EvoArmGenerator 

> You are an expert prompt optimizer. Your task is to perform an evolutionary operation on the target prompt using three donor prompts. 1.Identify the key elements and style differences between Donor 1 and Donor 2. Donor 1 (Pr1): {donor1_prompt} Donor 2 (Pr2): {donor2_prompt} 2.Mutate the different parts, considering the history of experiment: {history} 3. Combine the different parts with Prompt 3, selectively replace it with the different parts in Step 2 and generate a new prompt. Don’t use Donar 1 and Doner 2 as pronoun 4. Cross over the prompt in the Step 3 with the following basic prompt and generate a final prompt bracketed with <prompt> and </prompt> 5. Do not break original goal (if it’s mathmatical calculation, don’t mutate number and formula). Mutate expression and approach to accomlish original goal. 6. When mutating, simplify prompt as well ( especially for mathmatical calculation)

12 The LLM, acting as an "expert prompt opti-mizer," is instructed to analyze the stylistic and ele-mental differences between ‘donor1_prompt‘ and ‘donor2_prompt‘. It then mutates relevant parts based on the ‘history‘ of experiments, combines these with an implicit "Prompt 3," and performs a crossover operation with a "basic prompt." Crit-ical directives include maintaining the ‘original goal‘ (e.g., preserving numerical values and formu-las in mathematical calculations) while focusing on mutating ‘expression and approach‘. Addition-ally, simplification of the prompt during mutation is encouraged, particularly for mathematical tasks. The final output prompt is required to be enclosed within ‘<prompt>‘ and ‘</prompt>‘ tags. 

8.2.10 History-Based Novel Prompt Generator ( ArmGenerator )

This meta-prompt aims to generate entirely new prompts that fundamentally deviate from previous solutions, ensuring novelty while strictly adhering to the original task’s objective. It leverages the full ‘Experiment History‘ to strategically guide the LLM towards innovative approaches. 

Listing 8: ArmGenerator 

> You are a seasoned strategist overseeing prompt evolution. For the given "original prompt," leverage the following historical information to its fullest extent and generate a **novel prompt that distinctly deviates from previous approaches**. Experiment History: {history} Instructions for generating the new prompt: 1. **Fundamental Shift in Approach**: Deeply analyze the history above and devise a completely new approach that intentionally departs from the expressions, structures, or thought patterns adopted in previous attempts. 2. **Absolute Maintenance of Goal**: The ultimate goal defined by the original prompt , including specific numbers, formulas, or data in mathematical calculations, must not be altered for any reason. These must be entirely preserved in the new prompt. 3. **Refinement and Simplification of Expression **: The new approach should be more refined and concise to achieve the original goal. Especially in cases involving complex calculations or logic, eliminate redundancy and pursue the most efficient and clear expression possible. 4. Generate a final prompt bracketed with < prompt> and </prompt>

Acting as a "seasoned strategist," the LLM is tasked with generating a ‘novel prompt‘ that ‘dis-tinctly deviates from previous approaches‘ by thor-oughly analyzing the ‘Experiment History‘. The core instructions emphasize a ‘Fundamental Shift in Approach‘, meaning a deliberate departure from past expressions, structures, or thought patterns. Despite this push for novelty, the ‘Absolute Mainte-nance of Goal‘ is paramount, ensuring that critical elements like numbers and formulas in mathemati-cal contexts remain unchanged. Furthermore, the new approach should exhibit ‘Refinement and Sim-plification of Expression‘, eliminating redundancy and promoting efficiency, especially for complex tasks. As with the evolutionary prompt, the final output must be enclosed within < prompt > and 

< /prompt > tags. 13