Title: OOPrompt: Reifying Intents into Structured Artifacts for Modular and Iterative Prompting

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.19114v1

Published Time: Wed, 22 Apr 2026 00:45:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# OOPrompt: Reifying Intents into Structured Artifacts for Modular and Iterative Prompting 

# Tengyou Xu 

University of California, Los Angeles Los Angeles, California, USA tengyoux@ucla.edu 

# Detao Ma 

University of California, Los Angeles Los Angeles, California, USA detaoma2002@ucla.edu 

# Xiang ‘Anthony’ Chen 

University of California, Los Angeles Los Angeles, California, USA xac@ucla.edu 

## Abstract 

The rise of large language models (LLMs) has given rise to a class of prompt-based interactive systems where users primarily express their input in natural language. However, composing a prompt as a linear text string becomes unwieldy when capturing users’ multifaceted intents. We present Object-Oriented Prompting (OOPrompt ), an emergent interaction paradigm that enables users to create, edit, iterate, and reuse prompts as structured, manipula-ble artifacts, unifying and generalizing several existing point sys-tems. We first outlined a design space from existing work and built an early prototype, which we deployed as a probe in a formative study with 20 participants. Their feedback informed an expanded 

OOPrompt design space. We then developed the full OOPrompt 

prototype and conducted a validation study to further understand 

OOPrompt ’s added values and trade-offs. We expect the OOPrompt 

design space to provide theoretical and empirical guidance to the design and engineering of prompt-based, LLM-enabled interactive systems. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Human-centered computing → Interaction paradigms .

## Keywords 

Large language models; human-AI interaction; structured prompt-ing; design space 

## 1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) promise a powerful way for people to interface with software by simply describing their intent in natu-ral language, which, in turn, fosters an emergent class of interactive systems where the primary input is prompt-based. However, composing an effective prompt is challenging. Users often think of prompts as a linear string of tokens, but their in-tent may encompass multiple aspects, such as goals, constraints, roles, personas, context, and expected output format [ 16 , 35 , 42 , 52 ]. Current prompt-based interactive systems often default to a one-shot, unstructured input, which makes it difficult for users to rec-ognize, decompose, or iterate on the various key aspects of their intent [ 8, 23 , 26 , 37 , 44 ]. As a result, many users’ prompts only partially and sub-optimally represent their intent, thus limiting the quality of LLM’s response and the overall experience with the interactive system [13, 14, 24, 30, 34, 38, 47]. Recently, we have witnessed a paradigm shift from linear, one-shot prompts toward more structured, manipulable artifacts that externalize user intent, as demonstrated in several point systems. Examples include enabling iterative prompting by directly manipu-lating interface objects [ 27 , 35 ] and employing stateful UI controls (e.g. , radio buttons, checkboxes, and text fields) for deterministic prompt editing [ 8, 31 ], as well as breaking down prompts into cate-gorical dimensions to populate an explorable design space [ 7 , 41 ]. Perhaps the most relevant work is LangGPT , a conceptual frame-work that treats prompts as a programming language. It suggests classifying user intents into high-level ideas (“modules”) and spe-cific constraints (“elements”); prompts can then be structured as templates, with intents organized as instance variables in program-ming objects. Together all this prior work indicates an emerging interaction paradigm of Object-Oriented Prompting ( OOPrompt ), where the intents involved in the prompt, as well as the logical relation-ships between them, are reified into interactive objects that encapsu-late adjustable properties and support for iteration. Although prior work has implemented specific facets of this paradigm, they remain limited as point systems tailored to a single medium or workflow. Much as Shneiderman’s seminal essay unified disparate graphical interfaces under the “direct manipulation” banner [ 39 ], this paper aims to provide the missing formalization of OOPrompt .Fig. 1 is an overview of our key research activities following the methodology in [ 25 ]. Synthesizing insights from recent OOPrompt -related work, we first built an initial design space for OOPrompt ,based on which we then developed a minimum viable product (MVP) that helps users compose OOPrompt to send to conversa-tional language models ( e.g. , ChatGPT [ 1 ], Gemini [ 43 ]). To con-struct the full OOPrompt design space, we used this MVP as a probe in a formative study [ 10 ] with 20 participants who used the MVP to perform representative prompting-based tasks ( e.g. , writ-ing a short story, planning a trip). We then thematically analyzed participants’ feedback to derive a comprehensive design space of 

OOPrompt . Structured around the lifecycle of creating, reusing, editing, deploying, and evaluating an OOPrompt , the design space outlines key design issues to address at each step when engineering a prompt-based interactive system. Following the OOPrompt design space, we continued with fur-ther development of a full prototype and conducted a follow-up study with 8 returning participants to validate OOPrompt ’s added values and trade-offs. Participants went through three in-depth task scenarios using the OOPrompt prototype: reporting technical re-sults to diverse audiences, planning a group trip event, and debating with varying opinions. Each scenario included multiple sub-tasks, varying requirements, and/or different target audiences, followed by a brief interview about their experiences using OOPrompt . Findings indicate that, by turning prompts into modular, editable properties, 

OOPrompt makes planning and iterative writing faster and clearer, 

> arXiv:2604.19114v1 [cs.HC] 21 Apr 2026 Xu et al.

Figure 1: Overview of research process for developing Object-Oriented Prompting ( OOPrompt ), progressing through six stages following the methodology in [ 25 ]: initial conceptualization based on existing systems and principles of object-oriented programming (OOP), minimum viable product (MVP) development, formative study using MVP as a probe, design space synthesized from formative study findings, development of a full OOPrompt prototype, and its validation study. 

and better supports ambiguous, exploratory tasks, than traditional prompting. Meanwhile, OOPrompt struggles with opinion-forming reasoning and introduces extra steps that add latency, disrupt chat continuity, and require more automation to streamline integration into human-LLM interaction. The main contribution of this research is the OOPrompt design space, which is expected to provide theoretical and empirical guidance for the design and engineering of prompt-based, LLM-enabled interactive systems . Rather than defaulting to an oversimplified prompt box, a developer can adopt the OOPrompt 

design space as a specification for implementing a dialog for users to more fully and thoughtfully express their intent. 

## 2 Overview of OOPrompt and a Comparison with OOP 

Formally, we define OOPrompt as a paradigm for interacting with LLM-enabled systems, where the intents involved in a prompt, as well as the logical relationships between them, are reified into inter-active objects with adjustable properties and support for iterative refinement. OOPrompt leverages Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) as a conceptual metaphor to provide a structured framework for users to address abstract, complex intents. Rather than a lit-eral transplantation of the “object-oriented (OO)” framing from programming to prompting (which may be neither feasible nor necessary), OOPrompt incorporates the foundational properties of OOP as its core design rationales. Table 1 illustrates how OOPrompt 

relates to the four fundamental pillars of OOP (i.e., Encapsulation, Abstraction, Inheritance, and Polymorphism) [4]. Specifically, OOPrompt treats a prompt as a root-level object ( i.e. ,, a prompt object) composed of a collection of discrete, addressable units (i.e., properties). In this way, the prompt is no longer a mono-lithic block of text, but is decomposed into a set of intents. Each property functions as a container that encapsulates a specific aspect of user intent along with its associated metadata ( e.g. , , emphasis weights, stylistic constraints, and few-shot examples), ensuring that the internal logic of one intent does not functionally interfere with another. Further, OOPrompt supports recursive decomposition of a complex task, allowing the value of a property to be either a primitive text string or a reference to another child prompt object. This recursive relationship enables the system to maintain struc-tural consistency across varying levels of task complexity and helps users manage sophisticated hierarchical intents through a unified, modular interface. 

## 3 Related Work 

Recent work in the field of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) has been exploring innovative interactive paradigms and user interface designs that enhance prompting. Studies point out the gap between human articulation and AI/LLM cognition, usually due to natural language’s (NL) nature of ambiguity [ 16 , 38 ], redundancy [ 38 ], and fragility [ 12 , 44 ]. NL addresses niche cases related to open-ended or nuanced requirements [ 20 ]. However, communication through OOPrompt: Reifying Intents into Structured Artifacts for Modular and Iterative Prompting 

Table 1: Conceptual mapping between OOP and OOPrompt , based on the four fundamental pillars of OOP [4]       

> Principle Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) Object-Oriented Prompting ( OOPrompt )Abstraction Structuring complex systems by modeling classes based on essential properties and behaviors. Structuring the prompting of subtle, complex intent by decomposing it into the specification, editing, and suggestion of properties.
> Encapsulation Bundling data and methods that operate on that data within a single unit (class), and restricting direct access to some of an object’s components. Bundling aspects of a prompt’s underlying intent within a single interactive dialog with little restriction to directly access the prompt object’s components.
> Inheritance Allowing new classes to be based on existing classes, inheriting their attributes and meth-ods. Allowing new prompt objects to be based on existing templates, inheriting their intent properties and built-in supports such as editing and suggestions.
> Polymorphism Enabling objects of different types to be treated as objects of a common base type. Enabling different types of intents to be conveyed via a single prompt object.

NL prompts alone often cannot guide LLMs to meet users’ expecta-tions. For example, NL prompts sometimes include overgeneralized instructions, causing LLM-generated content to be inaccurate or underspecified [ 29 , 40 , 52 ]. Moreover, freeform NL prompts often fall short in helping users explore ways to express complex intents [ 41 ], and they can be inefficient for iterative prompt modification [2, 28, 44, 52]. To address these challenges, we review related work into two following categories: 

• conceptual prompt engineering principles : strategies and rules for composing effective prompts. 

• interactive interface design examples : exemplar sys-tems that help end users express abstract ideas through prompts. 

## 3.1 Conceptual Prompt Engineering Principles 

Past studies have revealed meaningful principles on constructing prompts for effective communication with LLMs. Among the many techniques developed as LLMs have rapidly advanced, “decomposition” has become a dominant approach for designing more instructive and manipulable prompts. One classic study has shown that decomposition can significantly improve LLM performance by breaking complex tasks or reasoning into multi-ple serial steps, often known as chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting [ 14 , 45 , 48 ]. Systems that leverage this concept demonstrate strong potential for improving the efficiency and effectiveness of commu-nication with LLMs. For example, DECOMP by Khot et al. further develops the CoT concept and establishes an effective few-shot par-adigm for solving complex tasks through hierarchical, recursive de-composition [ 14 ]. In addition to chronological decomposition, this motivation has also been extended to more conceptual and abstract exploration. Recent studies have been progressing to not only de-composition but also reconstruction. Some studies form structured prompts by summarizing from diverse real-world prompt exam-ples and designing general prompt structures, as an effective way of reorganizing the extracted components after decomposing the initial prompt [ 2 , 26 , 34 , 51 ]. Perhaps the closest work is LangGPT ,which first associates prompts with OOP to leverage the fact that programming languages are designed for efficient communication with machines. Specifically, it proposes a “dual-layer prompt design framework” that conceptualizes prompts as software projects, with modules and elements analogous to classes and methods to hier-archically address high-level intents and specific instructions [ 44 ]. However, LangGPT mainly focuses on the conceptual framework and validating it on existing LLMs; meanwhile, it remains unclear how user interfaces can appropriately support users to apply this idea to compose prompts as objects. Our work builds on the same OOP foundation and fills in this gap by formalizing the OOPrompt 

interaction paradigm. 

## 3.2 Interactive Interface Design Examples 

While studies in AI and prompt engineering provide many useful strategies for composing effective prompts, supported by both the-ory and experiments, a critical gap remains between the expertise required to apply these strategies and the accessibility needed for general end users to benefit from them. Simply forcing users to articulate their thoughts in a machine-preferred format is often neither efficient nor practical. The design of systems with proper interactions, therefore, is crucial to resolve this problem. Recently, the dominant perspective has focused on guiding users to build structured, reusable, and interactive artifacts from raw prompt text. Comprehensive studies have shown that users often prefer graphical interfaces for specifying low-level, quantifiable con-straints, especially in tasks such as information seeking [ 11 , 20 ]. We observe many valuable system paradigms following this approach. 

PromptChainer provided an early paradigm of visual programming interfaces for building chains of LLM prompts and rendering them as node-edge diagrams, helping users decompose complex tasks with improved transparency and controllability [ 47 ]. Similar de-signs have been further developed by other studies for better step-by-step planning, combinatorial querying, and organization of hier-archical logical relationships [ 2, 6, 13 , 42 , 46 ]. Focusing on helping Xu et al. 

users restructure and process rough prompts, recent research ex-tends interaction design toward element-level and dimension-level interaction, modification, and exploration, including possibilities that may not be explicit in the initial user prompt [ 9 , 41 ]. For ex-ample, Shen et al. provide a systematic framework, “4W1H” (“Why, When, Who, What, and How”), to analyze paradigms for designing interactions and instructions for generative AI [ 38 ]. PromptAid and 

PromptPilot import AI-powered modules to offer automated or semi-automated suggestions for vague or inaccurate wording [ 15 , 28 ]. 

Cells, Generators, and Lenses presents a typical approach that iden-tifies key elements (“cells”) for LLMs, then reassembles them to create multiple generators for parallel prototyping [ 16 ]. Similarly, 

Luminate highlights convergent-divergent thinking, helping users expand the idea space when building prompts [ 41 ]. Looking more closely at workflows, we also note studies that contribute effec-tive interaction techniques within their systems. Dynamic Prompt Middleware uses graphical elements such as buttons and check-boxes to replace direct text input [ 8 ]. Similarly, DirectGPT enables direct manipulation to improve interaction with LLMs by replacing verbose prompts with physical actions on interactive interface ele-ments [ 27 ]. AI-Instruments notably transforms AI capabilities into an embedded toolkit and embodies prompts as graphical interface objects, enabling text-independent manipulations such as “lenses” and “brushes” [ 35 ]. This work demonstrates effectiveness in prompt-ing abstract requirements that are difficult to describe clearly with words, echoing earlier object-oriented interaction ideas such as At-tribute Objects in Object-Oriented Drawing [ 49 ]. Collectively, these works contribute meaningfully to the development of interactive prompting systems, yet most target one specific task type or focus on a small set of augmentation techniques. Our OOPrompt work aims to construct a generalizable design space that addresses a wide range of design issues and task scenarios, integrating techniques to optimize prompts across different stages of the prompt lifecycle. 

## 4 Formative Study 

In this study, we formulated the OOPrompt design space by first synthesizing state-of-the-art OOPrompt -like systems, which pro-vided an initial version that we continued to build on by incor-porating empirical insights from participants interacting with a minimum viable product (MVP) implementation of OOPrompt .Specifically, we aimed to probe the following research questions: 

RQ1 How would users perceive and react to the high-level con-cept of OOPrompt ?

RQ2 How to develop and expand a comprehensive design space for OOPrompt ?

## 4.1 Initial Version of the Design Space Based on Literature Analysis 

We began with analyzing a selected set of papers [ 8, 16 , 28 , 35 , 38 , 41 ,47 , 49 ], which presented example systems and workflows closest to the core concept of OOPrompt . Our analysis followed a bottom-up process. First, we identified each paper’s interaction design or tech-nique related to OOPrompt . Then, by synthesizing these individual features, we constructed an initial design space that conceptualizes the OOPrompt lifecycle across six common stages, as illustrated in 

Fig. 2 : (1) Templating , concerning the construction of structured 

Figure 2: The initial design space of OOPrompt, outlining the key stages throughout the lifecycle of OOPrompt artifacts. 

“base classes” that serve as templates to pre-fill a prompt; (2) Initial-ization , where users instantiate an OOPrompt object via free-form text input; (3) Mapping , which reifies the underlying user intent into discrete, structured properties; (4) Refinement , involving the iterative editing and optimization of these intent properties; (5) 

Deployment , where the finalized prompt is formatted and sent to LLM; and (6) Evaluation , which provides users with feedback to facilitate further prompt optimization. 

## 4.2 Minimum Viable Product 

Fig. 3 shows the interface of the MVP, illustrating which function-alities the MVP supports and how users may interact with it. The basic workflow covered three core modules: creating , editing , and 

deploying an OOPrompt to LLM: 

• Create 

– Unstructured: input free text and let the system extract key information ( i.e. , , intent properties). 

– Structured: select and load an existing base class as a “template” to fill out. 

• Edit 

– Add new properties by name-value pairs. 

– Delete existing properties. 

– Edit the name and/or values of existing properties. 

– Generating different ways of describing existing prop-erties (“candidates”). 

– Manually rank the properties to indicate priority. 

• Deploy 

– Generate a final NL prompt based on all properties and send it to LLM. 

– Send the OOPrompt in JSON format to LLM. 

– Generate a prompt in a hybrid format that combines NL and JSON. 

## 4.3 Participants 

We recruited 20 participants from 11 universities/companies (6 in the United States, 2 in Canada, 1 in Japan, 1 in China, and 1 in Singapore) via convenience and snowball sampling. The inclusion criterion was familiarity with and/or interest in prompting LLMs for daily tasks. We maintained a balanced distribution of academic backgrounds during recruitment, resulting in 20 participants: 18 students from 9 universities and 2 recent graduates working at 2 companies. These participants included 17 males and 3 females, aged between 20 and 30 years. Among all participants, 12 were from engineering majors, and the others were from non-engineering OOPrompt: Reifying Intents into Structured Artifacts for Modular and Iterative Prompting 

Figure 3: The OOPrompt MVP workflow with a simple walkthrough example about trip planning. The diagram illustrates the end-to-end process of how user can interact with the interface, from initializing a prompt via templates or free-text input (A), through structuring and refining intent properties (B), to generating a final deployable prompt in natural language, JSON, or hybrid form (C). The example on the right demonstrates how a high-level request ( e.g. , trip planning) is progressively decomposed into structured, editable properties and compiled into a final prompt. 

backgrounds including music, marketing, biomedical science, busi-ness analytics, and statistics. Table 2 provides more details about participants’ background and affiliation, as well as additional infor-mation about their general usage of AI/LLM gathered through a pre-study survey. 

## 4.4 Tasks & Procedure 

We devised 3 sessions covering different types of LLM-based tasks. Every session consisted of a main task, with some examples of varia-tion in requirements or constraints. This design aimed to represent cases where users’ intent is emergent or exploratory, requiring iterative refinement (usually no more than 5 rounds) of articulation so users’ internal goals become more defined through interaction. To complete the tasks of each session, we encouraged each par-ticipant to keep iteratively modifying the prompt object until they felt satisfied with the generated content from LLM, or they could no longer find any further improvements to make. However, because of the formative nature of this study, we focused on discussing partici-pants’ feedback without requiring them to meet a hard requirement for each task. The specific tasks for each session were as follows. 

• Task 1: Reasoning . A domain-specific generative task with a known or expected answer, which can be validated Xu et al. 

Table 2: Backgrounds and typical usage of AI/LLMs of the participants in formative study. Participant IDs marked with * indicate users with an engineering background ID Background LLM Use Frequency Common Use Cases 

1* Electrical Engineering Daily Coding, developing 2* Electrical Engineering Daily Coding, developing 3 Social Science 4-6 times per week Writing assistance 4 Jazz Music Rarely N/A 5 Marketing 4-6 times per week Slides modification, copywriting 6* Computer Science Daily Coding, email modification 7 Biomedical 4-6 times per week General information searching 8* Data Science Daily Coding, information searching, email writing 9* Computer Science Daily Coding, information searching 10 Data Analysis 2-3 times per week Daily searching 11 Business Analysis Weekly Chatting 12 Statistics Daily Information Searching 13* Mechanical Engineering 4-6 times per week Information searching, text generation 14 Statistics 2-3 times per week Learning, information searching, writing 15* Method of Computation Daily Coding, code explanation, information searching 16* Computer Science 4-6 times per week Coding, developing 17* Computer Science 4-5 times per week coding, developing 18* Electrical Engineering 4-5 times per week Coding, information searching 19* Electrical Engineering Daily Coding, developing 20* Computer Science Daily Coding, information searching 

by reasoning or ground truth. The content was tailored to participants’ academic background: engineering and non-engineering. For example, participants with an electrical engineering and computer science (EECS) background com-pleted a script for training a randomly selected machine-learning model ( e.g. , Logistic Regression, Random Forest, Support Vector Machine, Neural Network), whereas par-ticipants from social science backgrounds performed a so-cial model derivation or analytical writing task. Partici-pants were asked to compose the entire use case based on their own experience and preferences, and include as many details as possible (e.g., EECS participants were ex-pected to specify requirements such as coding language, li-brary/toolkit, input/output data type and format, etc.). This task represented scenarios where users already had a clear understanding of the desired output and could anticipate how changes to the prompt would affect the result. 

• Task 2: Creative . A creative generative task in the form of story writing. Participants began by writing a very general and underspecified self-defined raw prompt ( e.g. , “Write a story.”) to obtain an initial LLM output, then extended or edited the prompt by selecting one or more keywords from a predefined list at each sub-task step. Participants analyzed whether each updated LLM output satisfied the new requirements. This task was designed to cover cases in which users need to convey abstract, perceptual, and imaginative ideas to an LLM. 

• Task 3: Investigative . An open-ended information-searching task, typically in the form of trip planning. This task was mainly user-driven, with minimal guidance and no predetermined ground-truth answer. Each participant OOPrompt: Reifying Intents into Structured Artifacts for Modular and Iterative Prompting 

was encouraged to start by choosing one target location of interest about which they had limited knowledge, then iteratively explore their interests and preferences, mainly relying on information provided by the LLM at each sub-task step, without using external sources such as Google. This task aimed to reflect scenarios in which users might shift their focus and interests when new information is revealed. During each task session in this formative study, we encouraged participants to assess whether LLM responses were satisfactory and to iterate on prompts to improve response quality. We applied think-aloud protocol to let the participants speak out their thoughts during the prompt refinement process, including goals, other pos-sibilities they would like to explore, any unsatisfied requirements, and suggestions on features that could be added to the current prototype. After all tasks were finished, we conducted semi-structured in-terviews. We asked participants to compare OOPrompt with the traditional way of prompting in each step and to reflect on advan-tages and drawbacks. We discussed participants’ overall attitudes toward OOPrompt , including its usefulness for prompting LLMs, major challenges during the tasks, and suggestions for improve-ment. 

## 4.5 Measurement & Analysis 

We took notes during the think-aloud process in completing the tasks as well as the post-task interviews. We then conducted a thematic analysis [ 5 ], segmenting each participant’s feedback into atomic points and mapping them to the skeleton of the initial design space. For each part of the design space, we clustered data points to surface recurring themes, which we summarized into issues that 

OOPrompt interaction design should address. 

## 4.6 Findings 

We summarize findings that respond to the two RQs. Note that, for RQ2, we focus on a high-level overview here, while leaving a detailed presentation of the resultant design space in the following section. 

RQ1: How would users perceive and react to the high-level concept of OOPrompt ? Participants demonstrated generally positive atti-tudes towards the overall concept of OOPrompt . Among all the participants in the formative study, 14 of them strongly felt that the direction which OOPrompt was exploring was meaningful after completing all study tasks using the MVP. While these participants found little difficulty in understanding the overall concept, some admitted that it may require a high ability of logical thinking to fully utilize OOPrompt . Meanwhile, 5 participants (P4, 7, 11, 16, 19) remained ambivalent, recognizing the potential of OOPrompt but feeling unsure due to the MVP’s technical limitation, such as overly simple prompt object structure, responding/processing latency, and LLM hallucination. Only 1 participant (P9) expressed a lack of mo-tivation to use OOPrompt . With a strong background in LLMs and prompt engineering, P9 had already been applying various prompt-ing techniques in daily work and needed no assistance from an external interface/system. As a result, P9 felt that using OOPrompt 

was unnecessary for their workflow and suggested that OOPrompt 

might be better targeted at less experienced user groups. 

RQ2: How to develop and expand a comprehensive design space for OOPrompt ? We selected the most commonly-mentioned emer-gent features from participants’ feedback. As a result, six recurring themes emerged, which we summarize below and discuss further in the next section as we expand the design space: (1) Free-text initialization . Participants preferred to start with a single rough, free-text prompt (P4, 5, 17, 20) even though it would seem ambiguous at the beginning (P20), suggesting that simultaneously displaying multiple ways of initialization can cause confusion (P8). At the same time, participants found that selecting templates to initialize OOPrompt required specific descriptions and examples to understand (P5, 6), and the cur-rent set of templates were too broad, not flexible enough to be helpful (P9, 10, 15). (2) Natural-language property edition . Participants demonstrated a strong preference to modify the intent property by typing in natural-language (NL) text, instead of being restricted to short property names and values (P1, 2, 3, 6, 14, 15, 16, 20). Furthermore, participants sometimes struggled in summariz-ing and rephrasing requirements into structured properties (P4, 5, 16, 20), which further emphasized the importance of NL-understanding support. (3) Advanced property structure . Participants expressed demands for composing more complex, informative properties in task 2 (P3, P10, 14, 15), such as designing the storyline structure (P3, 10), setting up the motif (P3), and developing the hidden plot (P3). Most of them expected a nested structure for describing a property. (4) Supplemental actions on properties . Participants shared vari-eties of additional ways to manage the properties. Many men-tioned an ‘exclude’ action, as they showed stronger awareness of what they did not want than what they preferred (P1, 2, 10, 11, 17). Moreover, participants generally wished to provide more context for the properties to prevent misunderstand-ings. Meanwhile, most participants felt negligible benefits of suggested different wording candidates to help them describe an intent property and some felt they needed suggestions by examples instead (P5, 9, 10, 12, 14, 20). (5) Global refinement beyond individual editing - Participants showed strong needs for a global refinement across the whole prompt after finishing modifying each individual property. Participants observed problems in LLM response when certain properties were incompatible with the others ( e.g. , a story written in a “horror” style but targeting to “children”) (P2, 4, 11, 20). Several participants also wished for the system to actively assist in completing the prompt design by actively suggesting more properties that fit the overall context (P10, 11, 13, 16, 17). (6) Clarified instruction in final prompt - Participants observed occasional misunderstandings in LLMs when directly submit-ting the generated prompt object in a JSON-style format (P1, 2). LLMs might be confused about the target of the prompt, and thus tend to interpret the meaning of the whole prompt object rather than considering it as an instruction. Participants Xu et al. 

suggested modifying the logic and format for generating final prompts, thus to better clarify how LLM should interpret it (P1, 2, 19, 20). 

## 5 OOPrompt Design Space 5.1 Initializing OOPrompt 

This stage involves users describing their goals or needs as input to formulate an OOPrompt , which may not be fully articulated on the get-go. 

5.1.1 Unstructured or structured format? Should we let the user describe their “raw” intents just like how they would input in a reg-ular prompt, or should we let them follow a more structured format, 

e.g. , filling in specific fields of “purpose”, “task type”, “audience”, “expected output criteria”? The unstructured format should be the default mode because users, at the beginning, might not have thought through the intent properties. Providing structured information fields “takes some time to think and may be inefficient ” (P6). P5 mentioned that users with little engineering background may struggle with extracting structured information, but are better at creative and divergent thinking. They usually tend to describe their intent in long complex sentences and expect AI to help them extract the logical structures. 

Examples from related work. In Dynamic Prompt Middleware ,users start the process by providing a NL prompt and then entering their goal or query into an open-ended text box [ 8 ]. In Low-code LLM users first input a task prompt, which is often a very brief description of the task they want to accomplish [ 6 ] Luminate waits for users to provide natural language prompts then uses this input and context to generate dimensions and values [41]. 

5.1.2 How to inherit from base classes? Besides initializing an 

OOPrompt by describing one’s intent from scratch, it is also possi-ble to inherit a templated OOPrompt from some base classes. To enable inheritance, an OOPrompt UI should address the following questions. 

What types of base classes? Admittedly, the small set of base classes used in the formative study is far from enough to meet participants’ needs (P10) and the implementation of OOPrompt 

should include a process of curating base classes relevant to the application context. Some participants would like to have more fine-grained categories—for example, “text generator” is too broad and needs to provide more specific subclasses (P9). P4 further pointed out that users could benefit from having different templates for individual intent properties as well. While we currently defined base classes by their output type ( e.g. , code, plan, story.), participants mentioned the need to search for a template by example (P5-6) or by use case (P4-6). 

How to support selective inheritance? Participants’ feedback in-dicated that OOPrompt UI should support automatically selecting the most appropriate base class while letting the user decide which subset of properties are the most relevant to inherit. In tasks 2 and 3, some participants (P9-11, 15-16) always deleted some default prop-erties (which were automatically imported from the “text generator” template) right after creating the prompt object. They mentioned that those properties might be too general, not needed, or did not exactly match their very use case. 

Polymorphism—can multiple inheritances occur? One participant mentioned that he “ expect(s) the LLM to return a mix of different types ” (P1). For example, when generating a poster for advertising an event, a user would want the OOPrompt to inherit from both the text generator and the image generator base classes. While not a common use case, the OOPrompt UI should nonetheless support users to select multiple base classes to inherit from during initial-ization. Further, OOPrompt UI should make it clear that inheriting more than one base classes does not indicate that the intent is am-biguous (P17); rather, it means the intent is multi-faceted and can be decomposed into multiple sub-intents. 

Examples from related work. LangGPT designs the structured ar-tifacts, “modules” (similar to “templates”), based on user role, goal, constraints, and output format. LangGPT also applies multiple in-heritance by allowing a single prompt to combine multiple modules (Profile, Constraint, Goal, Workflow, Style, etc.) [ 44 ] Object-Oriented Drawing ’s base classes consist of attributes of digital content (e.g., stroke, fill, drop shadow) and supports multiple inheritance by blending-holding two attribute objects of the same type to generate a child object that takes 50% from each parent [49] 

## 5.2 Mapping Intents to Properties 

Mapping intents to properties is necessary whenever there is an unstructured component in the initial user input ( i.e. , the raw intent). If there is an inheritance of base OOPrompt classes, we should first extract the raw intent to fill in the inherited properties. Intent properties that do not fit the base classes’ will be added separately to the OOPrompt .

5.2.1 Explicit vs. implicit intent properties? Some intents are ex-plicit, corresponding to specific parts of the raw input, e.g. , the intent of “output type” in the prompt, specified as “write a short story about ...” Other intents, however, can be implicit (unspoken), meaning there is no correspondence to the raw input but the user still have them in mind. For example, a user might intend to gener-ate and tell a bedtime story to their kid but might elude to mention “bedtime” in the prompt. OOPrompt UI should support extracting both types of intent properties. For implicit intent, P11 mentioned the possibility of “extrapolating” from the initial input. For example, if the current (explicit) intent properties include “output type: short story” and “topic: animal” , then the system can use these properties to retrieve other relevant yet unmentioned intent properties, e.g. , “audience” and “occasion” .

Examples from related work. One general way is to always start with generic, high-level questions about relevant concepts or facts, then instruct LLMs to rephrase and expand the question to un-cover more implicit details [ 37 , 50 ]. To this end, AI-Instruments 

captures implicit intents by organizing generated content based on users’ preferences and suggests alternatives, supporting an iterative loop where users refine, select, and discard prompts/content [ 35 ]. 

PromptPilot leverages the power of AI to proactively suggests task-appropriate prompts and formulates follow-up prompts users might consider, thus supporting intent discovery in a way with reduced OOPrompt: Reifying Intents into Structured Artifacts for Modular and Iterative Prompting 

Figure 4: The final design space of OOPrompt updated by insights gathered through the formative study. This illustrates the iterative workflow across five key stages: Initialization, Mapping intents to properties, Refining intent properties, Deployment, and Evaluation. Each stage highlights critical design questions, with example strategies, guiding how users and systems collaboratively structure, manipulate, and optimize prompt objects. Xu et al. 

cognitive load [ 15 ]. Moreover, human feedback may also be in-volved in this process. For example, one may generate multiple responses based on the raw input and letting users to select a pre-ferred one, to systematically refine the prompt to align with the user’s implicitly preferred criteria [19]. 

5.2.2 Sequential vs. parallel intent properties? Another dimension to distinguish different intent properties is their sequential vs. par-allel relationship with each other. A common example of sequential properties is steps, which is stereotypical when using the chain-of-thought [ 45 ] prompting techniques. Multiple participants (P4-5, 10-11) in the formative study used sequential properties in OOPrompt :beginning, events, and ending. In most other cases, multiple intent properties are considered (more or less) parallel to each other, such as narration style and hidden plot when generating a story (P3). However, as discussed later, sometimes intent properties are not completely parallel—their values might conflict with each other or they might have compatibility problem. Further, one participant noted that some prompts might contain sequential properties ( e.g. ,the sequence of a story: beginning, events, and ending), yet each of them, in turn, contains more than one parallel properties ( e.g. ,style, length, and tone) (P4). OOPrompt UI should automatically recognize whether certain intent properties are sequential, which should be treated as steps when finalizing the output OOPrompt ;further, users should be able to mark or create intent properties as sequential ones, which sometimes might involve grouping multiple parallel properties. To better organize such complex structures, P20 mentioned the possibility of explicitly toggling between “parallel” and “sequential” relationship between properties by a button, while P19 suggested to render properties in a table or flowchart to clearly represent all logic relationships. 

Examples from related work. Sequential intent properties are usually coherent series of intermediate steps [ 37 , 45 ]. To identify this type of properties, one most straightforward way is to directly ask users during initialization by questions such as “Explain your reasoning step by step.” [ 37 ]. It is also possible to instruct LLMs to decompose a problem into sequential sub-problems [ 13 , 14 , 37 ], or more generally, extract the overall hierarchical structure including both sequential steps and parallel atomic attributes [ 11 , 13 , 16 , 38 ]. On this point, beyond one-shot processing, some studies develop iterative frameworks to extract properties in different relationships round by round [ 22 , 37 ], while some also apply divide-and-conquer strategy [54]. 

5.2.3 What can be the values of intent properties? Other than map-ping the types of intent properties, it is also necessary to extract each one’s values from the initial raw input. Conventional prop-erties in objects are often described in text, which is naturally compatible with the textual format of prompts and is the default way of filling in an intent property. Instead of wordsmithing each intent property in short phrases, some participants suggested the option of typing in free text (P1-2, 6, 14-15). During the story writ-ing task, instead of editing an intent property, multiple participants opted to send another short prompt to provide additional details to elaborate on an intent. LLM’s interpretation of such addendum was suboptimal, as its response indicated that more context was needed. Such existing usage patterns ( i.e. , sending multiple prompts to iterate on one’s intent) indicated the need for a more integral ap-proach. OOPrompt UI should let users iterate on the same prompt in an object-oriented way, allowing them to freely express each intent property as an embedded component of OOPrompt . Further, 

OOPrompt UI can also let users input multiple possible values of an intent property when they feel unsure about the best way to describe it. In addition, participants mentioned defining an intent property by writing up examples on their own (P9, 10, 14) or pro-viding external references (P5, 12, 20). As discussed later, users can resolve such communication gap at deployment time by seeing and selecting different ways of generating the final OOPrompt . Usually, writing a single, linear prompt in a text box might have limited affordances for users to divide their focus on one specific intent property’s examples or references. In contrast, for each intent prop-erty, OOPrompt UI can support a user to search for, select, and organize one or more examples/references. 

Examples from related work. Most related projects depend on text value as the easiest but most generalizable type [ 13 , 14 , 26 , 38 , 44 ]. Some projects augment on purely text-based values by adding quan-tization components, usually in numeric values, to further define the extent or strength of certain intent properties [ 8 , 35 , 41 ]. Partic-ularly, AI-Instruments supports representing properties by graphi-cal interface objects, such as Fillable Brushes and Transformative Lenses, for transmitting complex, abstract, aesthetic attributes [ 35 ]. 

## 5.3 Refining Intent Properties 

Now that a user has initialized an OOPrompt with their intent prop-erties extracted, it is time for them to interact with those properties for further refinement, editing, and iteration. 

5.3.1 What can users do with intent properties? Besides the usual operations of addition, edit, and deletion, participants suggested the following actions users can take on intent properties. 

Creating hierarchy. One intent can be a composite of multi-ple “sub-intents”, which enables specifying more abstract or com-plex intents. For example, given the default extracted property of 

“output_type: story” , a user can create a hierarchy of “plot”, “structure”, “storyline” (P10, 14, 15). As users iterate on their prompts, they might come up with new “sub-intents” that can be or-ganized into a proper hierarchy, e.g. , hidden plot, associated/parallel storyline, echoing to earlier paragraph (P3). 

Scoring and/or ranking. Participants would like the ability to determine the priority relationship among different properties. Our initial MVP simply arranged intent properties in the order of their appearance in the raw input. P1 noted that properties placed at the bottom might receive less attention despite their potential impor-tance. Instead, OOPrompt UI should automatically infer or allow users to specify weights for each intent property, based on which the list of intent properties are sorted and ranked. Multiple partic-ipants, while agreeing on the motivation of scoring and ranking, disliked such methods since it would be too complex for users to de-termine the weight values or ranking relationships themselves (P1, 2, 17, 18). Some suggested simplifying scoring in numeric values to simple multiple choice on tiers or options ( e.g. , “not wanted at all, slightly wanted, normal, wanted, highly wanted”) for each property OOPrompt: Reifying Intents into Structured Artifacts for Modular and Iterative Prompting 

(P17, 18). Specifically, P17 acknowledged the need for automatic sorting by priority or importance, as a user might not have thought about which property is more important than the others. Some participants also supported disabling ranking to avoid explicitly comparison since, it was unnecessary (P1, 2, 17, 18). 

Exclusion. Interestingly, multiple participants pointed out the need to exclude certain intent properties or certain values of a given intent property. As one participant put it, “ Users may not know what they want, but know what they don’t ” (P1). OOPrompt 

UI should provide a “do not want” button next to each extracted intent property (P2, 10, 11, 15, 17, 18). For a given intent property, users can also specify a “counter-value”, e.g. , what not to include in the story’s characters. 

Version control. Participants mentioned the need to see change logs and to restore to a specific version of OOPrompt (P6, 12, 15). P6 suggested a toggle next to each intent property where the user can click to see its historical values. In addition, participants also would like to see each versions of OOPrompt in the context of the chat history (P2, 12, 17), because how LM responded to previous prompts as well as their “memory” might influence how users iterate on the 

OOPrompt .

Examples from related work. Related work show fundamental functionalities of adding, deleting, and editing properties, rendered in different ways including manual editions on text values and visu-alizations [ 8, 13 , 16 , 26 , 35 , 41 , 49 ]. Moreover, Luminate presents an inspiring design that enables users to change the quantization level of the dimensions by semantic zooming ( e.g. , adding more dots to the columns of certain dimensions on the graphical interface) [ 41 ]. Similarly, Dynamic Prompt Middleware allows quantization adjust-ment for properties by graphical elements such as buttons and knobs [ 8]. In addition to refining single properties, many studies present examples of storing model configurations to maintain pre-viously promising configurations for versioning [13, 16, 26, 28]. 

5.3.2 How to handle the uncertainty of intent properties? Uncer-tainty in prompting is often an inherent byproduct of the articu-lation gap, as human language cannot always perfectly translate internal thoughts and intents into explicit instructions. This form of uncertainty is rooted in the ambiguity of human expression rather than technical factors like model temperature or stochastic random-ness. As noted in prior work, Semantic mismatches between user intent and AI interpretation has been identified as a key design challenge [ 8 ] Specifically, as a property value usually consists of several key terms, users usually have limited idea how abstractly or specifically the model will generate the content (P4, 5, 9, 12, 16). For example, by providing the property “interest: food” 

during a trip planning task, the model could not fully understand if the user expected some specific examples of local food or just wanted a rough overall image of the local eating style (P9). Natu-rally, we came up with approaches such as generating candidates, different versions/forms with the same meaning, to each property value and assigning confidence score by the model to show cer-tainty. However, participants did not find these methods effective. Many participants observed that the appended candidates usually made negligible difference on the generated content (P9, 10, 13, 14). Those against scoring in addressing uncertainty issue stated that scores were not informative in truly guiding users to improve while making the process more complicated (P18, 19). P16 provided another potential alternative about system generating brief expla-nation for each intent property. Others mentioned further defining an intent property by providing specific examples (P9, 10, 14). Some also mentioned uploading files or documents as external references corresponding to any single intent property (P5, 12, 20). 

Examples from related work. AI-Instruments presented “Fillable Brushes”, a highly efficient and straightforward way of sampling and referencing—users may “fill” an empty brush by using existing content from source images as examples, functioning like a color picker but capturing perceptual, abstract attributes like style [ 35 ]. An approach used by multiple related projects involves a large database of specific examples to help users find the right style, which supports refinement of text-to-image prompts by exploring, comparing, and modifying styles through interactive lists [ 16 , 35 ,37 , 38 ]. Also, another general method is to let the system provide multiple example options for each attribute/property/dimension, then users may select an option or self-define a new one based on the given options [8, 13, 28, 35, 41]. 

5.3.3 How to resolve conflicts/errors/incompatibility? One unex-pected topic that came up in the formative study was how partici-pants noticed the possibilities of intent properties having conflicts, errors, or incompatibility relative to one another. This can be a common problem when users iteratively edit a long and complex prompt—some later addition/edition might have conflicts with some earlier elements. Consider a trip planning example: initially a user might define the length as two days but later change their mind to three days, adding what they want to do on the third day in the prompt, without updating the trip length property. P2 experienced similar issue in a story writing task; P2 first defined a “humorous, happy” tone and a “good ending”, then changed to “bad ending” while forgetting to adjust the tone. This potential conflict resulted weird, low-quality generated content. Therefore, P2 suggested au-tomatic conflict checking among intent properties to prevent users’ oversight. 

Examples from related work. Dynamic Prompt Middleware re-solves conflicts between prompt dimensions by dynamically con-straining incompatible options ( e.g. , using single-select controls) for conflicting attributes and instructing the model to reconcile or ignore conflicting refinements. Also, CoPrompter systematically addresses this issue by decomposing complex prompts into atomic criteria via LLM-based decomposition and metadata analysis. It then highlights overlaps, subjectivity, or inconsistent interpreta-tions among attributes, and presents to users so they may manually update prompt and fix the conflicts. 

## 5.4 Deploying OOPrompt 

Once users finish refining an OOPrompt , the next step is to make it ready for deployment, i.e. , sending it to LLM for generating the desired output. 

5.4.1 Output format: natural language or object-oriented? Most prompts by default are sent to LLM in natural language because it is easier for users to compose rather than necessary for LLM Xu et al. 

to understand. Therefore, an OOPrompt does not have to be in natural language—in fact, we observed that phrasing multiple intent properties in natural language sometimes resulted in LLM ignoring some properties. Alternatively, OOPrompt can just present itself in an object-oriented format, such as JSON. However, context is needed when sending a JSON version of OOPrompt . P2 observed that sometimes if only a JSON object was sent, LLM would not perform the tasks, but try to explain and analyze the meaning of the JSON object. Therefore, the recommended approach is helping users generate the JSON-formatted OOPrompt with natural language descriptions, as such a “hybrid” format may be more detailed and accurate (P1, 2, 17, 19, 20). P19 agreed that purely a JSON object would not guide LLM well, elaborating that the LLMs need to be well set up with system prompts to solve this issue. Meanwhile, P19 supposed that appending NL instructions to JSON objects might perform similarly to adding a system prompt, so it might be a good strategy. 

Examples from related work. Many projects choose to gener-ate output prompts similar to unstructured, NL prompt, proba-bly with some diction/language refinement and additional sen-tences carrying extra information [ 28 , 32 ]. Those that import struc-turing techniques such as templates may support submitting the predefined templates with content inserted to LLMs to generate content [ 26 , 28 , 44 , 47 ]. Specifically, some templates are designed to explicitly differentiate high-level intents and specific details, so they may better guide LLMs to perform exactly the expected tasks [28, 44]. 

5.4.2 Generating single vs. multiple prompt objects? In cases where users specify multiple intent properties that need further elabora-tion ( e.g. , users may want to assign specific characters and events to each paragraph of a story), OOPrompt UI can also help them gener-ate multiple and/or recursive prompt objects if the initial intent has too complicated structure or is too informative to be encapsulate in a single property value via text articulation (P3, 4, 5, 10, 11, 18, 19). Another reason to generate multiple prompt objects is to let the user see alternatives— OOPrompt UI can allow them to see different ways of describing their intents other than their edited versions. As mentioned earlier, users should be able to specify multiple possible values for a given intent property and such uncertainty can be resolved now as the OOPrompt UI synthesize those alternatives into a few different prompt objects. 

Examples from related work. Based on the idea of CoT [ 45 ], re-lated work includes many projects that try to decompose a compli-cated task, either done by users or systems, into chained sub-tasks for better consistency and performance [ 6 , 14 , 47 ]. Other studies introduce more complex hierarchical structure between the multi-ple sub-prompt objects. For example, ChainForge builds templates that can be recursively nested, thus improving the capability of hierarchy organization [ 2]. AI-Instruments supports converting sub-objects to instruments that can be reused and even combined with other instruments, allowing even higher flexibility [35]. 

## 5.5 Evaluating OOPrompt 

5.5.1 Static vs. dynamic analyses? Similar to programming lan-guage, OOPrompt UI can perform some static analysis of the gen-erated prompt object before sending it to LLM. Note that such an analysis could also happen earlier, as above-mentioned, e.g. , check-ing conflicts between intent properties. In comparison, a final check at this step is more holistic and a non-exhaustive list of things to analyze includes (i) the number of tokens, which might matter if users refer to multiple sources of references when specifying intent properties; (ii) similarity with other OOPrompt examples (assum-ing there is access to a library of them), which can help users see whether they miss any intent properties, e.g. , forgetting to spec-ify programming language in code generation (P1, 2, 17, 19); and 

(iii) safety, which is a standard measure in general LLM usage, e.g. ,no dark themes such as “sorrow” or “horror” for “children” as audi-ence (P4, 20), no instructions on generating explicit/sensitive/toxic content (P11), information legitimacy of any external websites or other types of sources to be included in the output content (P7, 9, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16). In addition, OOPrompt UI can let users perform a dynamic analy-sis by running one or more prompt objects through LLM, which will generate results that are in turn analyzed by another (evaluative) LLM to determine which OOPrompt works better. First, the user needs to define how the evaluative LLM should judge the results. Then, the user selects the prompt objects they would like to compare with each other. Optionally, the user can also select one or more LLMs to ensure a more unbiased perspective. Next, the OOPrompt 

UI automatically runs the test and generate a performance report, which can help the user select a version of OOPrompt that are most likely to work. Users showed majority preferences on self-evaluation during the study tasks, explaining that though an evaluative LLM may work well for objective tasks such as coding (P17), it cannot guarantee a good evaluation performance on personal, subjective requirements, especially in creative tasks, due to the uncertainty and implicitness in human-system communication (P17, 18, 19). Despite this, for system-side evaluation, participants generally preferred more sug-gestive evaluation instead of purely scoring or judging (P2, 3, 10, 11, 16, 17, 20). 

Examples from related work. CoPrompter relies on Criteria Ques-tions (CQs) derived from decomposing user input into atomic in-tents, as well as categorical alignment scores determined by evalua-tive LLMs, for assessing consistency [ 13 ]. ChainForge also leverages evaluative LLMs, but to determine evaluation scores based on pro-vided ground truth data [ 2 ]. Self-Supervised Prompt Optimization 

uses a reference-free evaluation paradigm, involving an LLM eval-uator performing pairwise comparison of outputs generated by different prompts [ 50 ]. iPrOp involves a human-in-the-loop pro-cess and considers four key prompt properties: Performance on annotated data, readability and interpretability, quality of an ex-planation, and alignment of annotations [ 18 ]. Prompt Optimization with Human Feedback relies entirely on human preference feed-back, training a model to predict a latent score for each prompt [ 19 ]. 

EvalLM uses an LLM-as-a-judge to provide feedback based on user-defined, qualitative criteria [17]. OOPrompt: Reifying Intents into Structured Artifacts for Modular and Iterative Prompting 

5.5.2 How to enable and integrate user feedback? Other than the above-mentioned systemic analyses, users should also be able to directly edit or rank the prompt objects, such as rephrasing an intent property inline or mark preferences of certain versions of the OOPrompt for later references (P1, 2, 3, 4, 17, 18). Further, users can also provide feedback, via free text input, after reviewing the OOPrompt holistically (P2, 6, 15, 20). Instead of going back to editing low-level intent properties, OOPrompt UI should recognize and incorporate such holistic feedback and automatically update necessary intent properties for the user. P19 also mentioned the possibility of iteratively adjusting criteria of the evaluative LLM, instead of prompts, based on human feedback. 

Examples from related work. PromptPilot waits for users to share some keywords or phrases and directly generates relevant prompts tailored to the task context [ 15 ]. PromptAid allows users to select system recommendations for keyword suggestions or paraphrases from a recommendation panel then test the custom-curated exam-ples with LLMs to see the effects [ 28 ]. Dynamic Prompt Middleware 

enables users to generate their own new options via NL prompt-ing, thus having more graphical elements on the interface to be interactively adjusted [8]. 

## 6 Validation Study 

Guided by the design space, we iterated on the MVP to develop a full prototype that addressed the main design questions throughout the life cycle of an OOPrompt . We then conducted a validation study to further understand the effects of OOPrompt on users’ interaction with LLM. Specifically, we are interested in answering the research question: RQ3 What are the added values and trade-offs of using 

OOPrompt compared with traditional prompting ap-proaches? 

## 6.1 Full OOPrompt Prototype 

Prototype Interface & Walkthrough Example. We implemented a full OOPrompt prototype to operationalize the complete design space and conduct validation study. Fig. 5 provides a technical walkthrough of the OOPrompt prototype, illustrating the corre-spondence between the graphical user interface and the underlying hierarchical prompt objects. To illustrate the system in practice, consider a user planning a multi-city travel itinerary. The workflow begins when the user enters a broad intent, such as “Plan a trip to Los Angeles,” which the system reifies into an initial Prompt Object (Fig. 5A ). To refine this, the user adds specific Property Objects like “Destination” and “Interests” ( Fig. 5B ). The user may manually type in or call the AI to generate examples for any property, in case that a text value is not enough to clearly articulate the intent ( Fig. 5B ). For example, when the user is interested in “Local street food” during the trip, they can specify it to be similar to “taco trucks” or “BBQ”. For complex requirements like a daily “Schedule,” the user utilizes Nested Organization (Fig. 5C) to instantiate a child Prompt object, effectively breaking a large task into manageable, hierarchical sub-tasks. After finishing one round of Prompt Object construction, the user may trigger AI Analysis (Fig. 5D) to analyze and generate improvement suggestions ( e.g. , suggesting more properties, such as “Daily pace” to ensuring the prompt is comprehensive). Finally, the user may export an output prompt from the OOPrompt Object and send to any preferred LLM for content generation, while being able to toggle between different saved versions in the History Menu (Fig. 5E) to compare outputs. 

## 6.2 Study Procedures 

We recruited 8 returning participants from the formative study. Run-ning through the whole test without any supervision or assistance from our team, participants were first provided with a six-slide tutorial with graphical illustrations that demonstrate how the func-tionalities work via a complete walkthrough example. Our goal was to ensure that participants were adequately familiar with the proto-type, thus preventing low performance caused by under-utilization of features. While the formative study consisted of mostly broad, unspecific tasks to stimulate open-ended exploration and to seek constructive suggestions, the final validation study involved well-defined, real-world scenarios, with clearly specified target audiences and explicit evaluation criteria. Each scenario is presented following a uniform format: Scenario Setting, General Requirements, and multiple Tasks with guide. Fig. 6 illustrated one example. Before the validation study began, we first ensured that (1) each participant fully understood the purpose and meaning of all task descriptions, and (2) each participant was capable of empirically assessing whether the generated content was in sufficient quality, based on their relevant real-life experience. Under this condition, we defined the primary criterion for task completion as “producing con-tent that was ready for practical use”. In other words, the generated content should be able to address any real-world considerations and personal demands that the participant could identify. This setup aimed to elicit the most accurate and contextually grounded feed-back on how well OOPrompt supported the specific needs from participants with different background. During the validation study, we provided three scenarios that were intentionally designed to represent different levels of con-straint density and complexity. In each scenario, participants were first asked to try traditional text-based prompting (which was inher-ently supported by the prototype), and then to perform the task with 

OOPrompt . We did not counterbalance the order of OOPrompt vs. 

traditional prompting because using OOPrompt first would likely have a larger carryover effect ( i.e. , participants would already know what a prompt should contain after using OOPrompt ). Table 3 presents details of the scenario settings, tasks, and key considera-tions, as well as the types of cases they target. 

## 6.3 Data Collection & Analysis 

After finishing the tasks in all scenarios, we conducted a semi-structured interview with each participant, using the following questions to elicit their feedback on OOPrompt :(1) Jointly considering the effectiveness and efforts of prompt-ing, how would you compare OOPrompt with traditional prompting? Which approach would you prefer for each of the three scenarios? (2) Which prompting approach helped capture considerations that you would have missed? Xu et al. 

Figure 5: The OOPrompt system pipeline and underlying data structure. (A) Initialization: A raw natural language intent is reified into a base Prompt Object. (B) Property Definition: Abstract attributes are encapsulated into Property Objects with specific states like emphasis and examples. (C) Hierarchical Structure: Users manage complexity through nested organization, where a property can instantiate a child Prompt Object, creating a parent-child relationship. (D) Evaluation & Suggestion: The system provides AI-assisted evaluations with suggested solutions ( e.g. , more properties, conflict check, language refinement). (E) Versioning & Deployment: The final prompt is generated via a hybrid logic approach, while previous versions are stored as distinct, restorable assets in a history menu. 

(3) If you need to perform tasks similar to the ones in this study regularly at a daily basis, which prompting approach would you prefer? (4) What types of real-world task would benefit most from 

OOPrompt ?(5) What frustrated you about OOPrompt ? What are the cur-rent limitations of the prototype? We took a thematic approach [ 5] to analyze the qualitative data from participants’ free responses. First, we broke down the tran-scribed text into atomic segments. We then clustered and coded the OOPrompt: Reifying Intents into Structured Artifacts for Modular and Iterative Prompting 

Figure 6: An example showing the differences between the task settings in formative study and validation study. The formative study focused on free exploration of users’ self-defined goals to uncover deficiencies and gather suggestions. However, the validation study described specific scenarios and provided well-defined task requirements for users to accomplish. Table 3: Validation study test scenarios with the cases they targeted to evaluate, settings, and tasks. 

Scenario Targeted Case Setting Tasks 1. Technical Reporting 

High constraint density • Setting: A project is two weeks behind sched-ule. Report to different audiences. 

• Considerations: Tone, communicative pur-pose, focus, etc. 

• Task 1.1: Report to peer group. 

• Task 1.2: Report to manager. 

• Task 1.3: Report to angry stakeholder. 

2. Group Trip Planning 

High hierarchical depth • Setting: Retreat for 50 people in Denver, Col-orado. Plan the trip. 

• Considerations: Unexpected cases, backup plans, event scheduling, etc. 

• Task 2: Make a plan. Address all details for any potential subtask. 

3. Purposeful Debate 

High structural uncertainty, low compressibility 

• Setting: Alex prefers stocks; Bill wants a world trip. Navigate this conflict. 

• Considerations: Reasoning integrity, persua-siveness, etc. 

• Task 3.1: Support Alex against Bill. 

• Task 3.2: Support Bill against Alex. 

• Task 3.3: Support yourself against both. 

extracted segments, and finally reviewed the organized feedback to summarize participants’ perceived efficiency, effectiveness, and prompting preferences when using OOPrompt across different task scenarios. We further examined participants’ choices and corre-sponding explanations to identify trade-offs and their rationales. The findings were synthesized to characterize the main dimen-sions of these trade-offs and to reveal how users interpreted the advantages and limitations of OOPrompt compared with traditional prompting practices. 

## 6.4 Findings 

Our findings reveal both the added values and trade-offs of 

OOPrompt .

By turning prompts into modular, editable properties, 

OOPrompt makes planning and iterative writing faster and clearer than traditional prompting, and better supports am-biguous, exploratory tasks. We observed several prominent ben-efits of OOPrompt . In Scenario 1 (evolving report writing), five of seven participants considered OOPrompt more efficient, while one Xu et al. 

preferred traditional prompting and two perceived no difference. In Scenario 2 (event planning discovery), seven participants preferred 

OOPrompt , with one reporting no difference. In the first two scenar-ios, most participants identified certain task types that best show-cased the strengths of OOPrompt , such as planning with decision making (U2, U4, U6) and report drafting involving iteratively rewrit-ing (U3, U5, U6). Specifically, U2 described that OOPrompt was preferred for “ tasks that require planning, tone change, or anything that is actually creation but not question-answering. ” Meanwhile, U7 tried to summarize from high level that OOPrompt would be generally helpful with “ tasks with clear patterns. ” Compared with traditional prompting, participants tended to describe OOPrompt 

as offering a clearer conceptual structure and helping them organize thoughts and task components before generating the final prompt. This highlighted OOPrompt ’s capability in modular representa-tion, which provided a reusable medium for iterative modifications and thereby improved the efficiency and consistency of prompt evolution (U3, U5, U7). Moreover, some participants pointed out 

OOPrompt ’s usefulness in handling more broadly, ambiguously defined instructions. Participants generally agreed that OOPrompt 

helped users capture and articulate concepts they might have other-wise overlooked (U1–U8). Participants also found OOPrompt better handle tasks that were difficult to grasp (U1, U8) during prompt construction. For instance, U8 mentioned that OOPrompt would be useful when “users themselves do not completely understand what the task is referring to; ” U1 stated another advantageous case for OOPrompt was that “ users do not have clear ideas in mind on how they want the result to be. ” All the feedback collectively sug-gested that OOPrompt enables more deliberate manipulation and exploration over the logic and completeness of the task framing. 

Meanwhile, OOPrompt struggles with opinion-forming reasoning and it introduces extra steps that add latency, dis-rupt chat continuity, and need more automation to stream-line its integration into human-LLM interaction. In Scenario 3 (debating and convincing), one major issue was that participants found it difficult to convert reasoning and argumentative logic into structured intent properties, which led them to continue composing most inputs in long natural language sentences even when using 

OOPrompt (U2, U3, U7). As a result, OOPrompt provided limited improvement in prompting efficiency in this scenario, highlight-ing its weakness in efficiently capturing and expressing nuances in users’ reasoning processes. Beyond this specific scenario, some participants also experienced noticeable processing latency during different steps, including calling AI suggestions and generating the final prompt for deployment (U1, U3, U5). This might have been caused by the serially connected LLM assistants in the workflow structure. Although this technical issue could be improved with faster, lighter-weight models in the future, it still suggests how 

OOPrompt would inevitably introduce extra system processing overhead and slow down the back-and-forth interaction between users and LLM. Several participants also noted that while conven-tional prompting involved continuous dialogue contexts for hu-man–LLM conversation, OOPrompt treated prompts as relatively independent query objects, making it harder for them to quickly adapt to this new interaction paradigm (U1, U4, U7, U8). Further-more, U2 specifically expressed the demand for higher automation by describing that the property suggestion module or other AI ob-jective analysis module could present available results as options immediately after raw-text initialization, instead of waiting for users to click on buttons to call the wanted functionalities. Based on findings in the validation study, we summarize val-ues and trade-offs brought by OOPrompt , compared to traditional prompting, in Table 4. The table highlights how shifting to a modu-lar, object-oriented structure enhances efficiency and organization. In the next section, we further discuss the underlying reasons of the pros & cons from both conceptual design and implementation perspectives. We also propose potential strategies to address the current drawbacks, leaving their experimental validation and the exploration of new optimization approaches for future work. 

## 7 Discussion 

In this section, we discuss possible reasons behind the observed strengths and trade-offs of OOPrompt , aiming to uncover the fun-damental trade-offs between OOPrompt and traditional prompting from both conceptual and implementation perspectives. Then, we discuss limitations of this research and future work. 

## 7.1 OOPrompt Values & Trade-offs 

7.1.1 OOPrompt excels at tasks with high constraint density. Tasks with high constraint density, such as report or document writing, typically involve multiple elements (e.g., tone, audience, language style, and focus) that must be integrated coherently through prompt-ing. In such cases, users often compose several descriptive sentences in parallel, each addressing one particular aspect. OOPrompt ’s mod-ular structure simplifies this process by allowing users to formalize and organize these elements systematically. The advantage becomes especially marked when the task includes numerous requirements that span different dimensions. However, for tasks with low com-positional demand, prompts in a structured format may even nega-tively affect overall performance. Transforming a simple prompt with only a few conditions into an OOPrompt structure does not yield the expected advantages, such as reduced effort in sentence formulation, easier iterative modification, or clearer logical orga-nization. Instead, this transformation can introduce unnecessary complexity and potentially disrupt the natural continuity of the original prompt. 

7.1.2 OOPrompt outperforms in tasks with high hierarchical depth. 

We observed that a task’s hierarchical depth can affect OOPrompt ’s effectiveness. This is reflected in the degree to which a task can be decomposed into multiple sub-levels that follow a clear abstraction hierarchy. Tasks with explicit hierarchical organization align well with OOPrompt ’s nested property mechanism. For example, a story may involve several layers, ranging from the main narrative event (top layer) to detailed scene-level attributes such as characters’ cloth-ing color or hairstyle (bottom layer). This structure enables users to extract and manage the task’s logical organization across abstrac-tion levels, facilitating construction and refinement of OOPrompt 

objects at specific levels as needed. By contrast, when task require-ments have no further hierarchical details to extract, prompting in 

OOPrompt may feel unnecessary or redundant because it may not produce meaningful differences from a raw prompt. OOPrompt: Reifying Intents into Structured Artifacts for Modular and Iterative Prompting 

Table 4: Structured summary of where OOPrompt adds value and where trade-offs appear, based on participant feedback across scenarios.                         

> Capability Traditional Prompting OOPrompt OOPrompt ’s Value & Trade-offs Representation Linear, monolithic text strings. Modular intent properties edited in isolation.
> +Clearer structure; safer iterative edits and branching.
> –Up-front setup can feel like overhead for tiny tasks.
> Organization “Wall of text” with implicit hierar-chy. Hierarchical composition of sub-tasks/objects.
> +Granular decomposition without losing global context.
> –May over-structure when goals are fluid or ill-formed.
> Intent Articula-tion
> Intent remains implicit; easy to miss constraints. System-assisted property sugges-tions/extraction.
> +Surfaces overlooked concepts and gaps.
> –Users wanted more proactive, auto-filled suggestions; quality varies by model.
> Iteration Flow Conversational back-and-forth in a single chat thread. Object-centred editing with his-tory and versioning.
> +Controlled differences; reproducibility across versions.
> –Can fragment the “chat rhythm” some users prefer.
> Execution Pipeline
> Typically one-shot calls. Multi-step pipeline. +Better auditability and reuse.
> –Added latency and token cost from serial steps.
> Evaluation Manual check in chat by human users. LLM-assisted analysis ( e.g. ,length, style, cohesiveness, etc.)
> +Faster, more consistent comparisons.
> –Metrics may miss nuance; needs human review for judgment tasks.

7.1.3 OOPrompt specializes in tasks with strong repetitiveness. 

Sometimes a task or its sub-components are repeated, refined, or reused across similar contexts. Tasks with high repetitiveness, such as routine report updates or iterative content revisions, tend to benefit from OOPrompt ’s modular and reusable structure. By encapsulating each intent or property as an independent object, 

OOPrompt allows users to adjust or regenerate specific parts without rephrasing the entire prompt or recapping previously mentioned contextual information, thereby improving efficiency and consistency across iterations. In contrast, highly unique or one-off tasks offer fewer opportunities for reuse, diminishing the advantages of OOPrompt ’s object-based representation. 

7.1.4 OOPrompt struggles with tasks where constraints are highly incompressible. There are varying degrees of compressibility when specifying intermediate reasoning or detailed instructions during human-LLM communication. For example, when prompting an LLM to generate descriptive text with a desired effect, users may choose to provide only a few target keywords ( e.g. , beautiful, de-licious, hot) and allow the model to determine how to produce these effects, or they may explicitly prescribe specific rhetorical techniques to be applied in writing. When users care deeply about the concrete methods or reasoning steps through which the task is executed, OOPrompt can substantially reduce the time and effort required to encode such details in the prompt. However, OOPrompt 

becomes less useful when no compression or abstraction is possible, in other words, when users must explicitly specify every reasoning step or detail to achieve correctness. For instance, in tasks like logi-cal argumentation with fixed reasoning logic, users must input the full reasoning chain as plain text regardless of prompting method. In this case, OOPrompt offers little improvement in efficiency while adding time and cognitive cost due to the interactive modules. 

## 7.2 Limitation & Future Work 

7.2.1 Response speed and automaticity. The relatively high re-sponse latency mainly stems from the current prototype’s workflow structure, which involves multiple LLM assistants, each responsi-ble for a specific module. During a full OOPrompt lifecycle, users may need to query these assistants sequentially through multiple API calls, causing accumulated waiting time and reduced overall processing speed. To address this issue, we consider it together with users’ suggestions for enhancing automation. Fig. 7 illustrates one updated design. Instead of querying assistants in strict serial order, future OOPrompt workflows may improve by allowing par-allel calls to multiple assistants within a single stage. This design would significantly reduce total response time and create a more automatic user experience. However, careful tuning of multithread-ing settings and assistant parameters will be required to ensure a smooth, balanced experience and prevent overly redundant or constrained options at each stage. 

7.2.2 Structured tasks with uncertain complexity and low compress-ibility. We believe that the difficulties encountered by OOPrompt 

in tasks with high structural uncertainty are primarily due to the nature of the “OO” paradigm rather than inefficient implementation. In tasks such as philosophical debate or sequential reasoning chains, an instruction’s value usually lies in holistic flow rather than mod-ular units. While OOPrompt is optimized for encapsulation and reusability, it may lead to friction when users must decompose in-compressible, monolithic logic into discrete, hierarchical properties. To mitigate this, participant U3 suggested including a “ background setting as a default property ” to better support unorganized intent. Integrating a “Global Context” as a default primary property in the base class could help the system better handle unstructured logic while maintaining the benefits of the OO framework. Future work Xu et al. 

Figure 7: Example implementation of an improved 

OOPrompt workflow that autonomously calls multiple LLM assistants in parallel. After the user submits the raw input, the system simultaneously extracts properties and generates corresponding examples and modification suggestions within the same step. All results are produced automatically without additional user activation and are presented as options for selective application to the prompt object. The same procedure repeats for each newly confirmed version of the property space, reducing response latency and improving overall workflow automation. 

should explore a pipeline that uses this context layer to facilitate an “unstructured-to-structured” transition, allowing the system to generalize more effectively across task types. 

7.2.3 Dialogue history context. Some participants raised concerns about dialogue-history discontinuity, which likely reflects a funda-mental design issue of OOPrompt . In traditional prompting, users typically add supplementary information through follow-up queries within the same dialogue context [ 21 , 36 ], rather than rewriting the entire prompt to incorporate previous and new content. In contrast, OOPrompt automatically integrates full preceding con-text into each updated prompt, essentially performing what users often avoid in traditional prompting, albeit implicitly. To prevent inconsistencies between earlier and later prompt versions (where information may conflict or shift in meaning across coexisting ver-sions), our current prototype intentionally separates each query from full dialogue history. During the validation study, participant U8 suggested a potentially feasible solution: converting early dia-logue context into static properties that are consistently included in prompt objects. While this approach could help maintain continu-ity without sacrificing consistency, efficient design of the required data structures and transformation mechanisms remains an open question for future work. 

7.2.4 Multi-modal task support. Although we initiated prelimi-nary discussions on extending OOPrompt to multi-modal tasks (e.g. , generating content that combines text and images), the cur-rent prototype evaluated in the validation study supports only text-based tasks such as writing and coding. This serves as an ini-tial step toward exploring the broader potential of OOPrompt as a prompting paradigm. We believe that incorporating additional 

Figure 8: A schematic illustration of OOPrompt ’s envisioned spatial manipulation of intent properties in image genera-tion tasks. By arranging and placing property blocks of cat, apple, and table within the OOPrompt interface, users can simply control spatial relationships of these three objects in the generated image. 

modalities ( e.g. , images, audio, or video) could inspire new direc-tions for optimization and generalization. For example, modern state-of-the-art text-to-image models like DALL-E [ 3, 33 ] still lack a formal, user-facing structural paradigm for manipulating discrete visual entities. Meanwhile, techniques like ControlNet [ 53 ] have introduced spatial constraints to guide the text-to-image generation process. We see OOPrompt ’s potential to be a bridge to provide users with explicit, object-level control over the prompt, as well as a more simplified, semantic way of spatial and structural guid-ance. Future work may investigate how abstract representations from different modalities can be efficiently utilized to enrich the 

OOPrompt framework. For instance, Fig. 8 shows a simple visual interface design of representing intent properties through spatial cues (e.g., vertical or horizontal placement) could potentially be mapped to compositional attributes in image generation, such as the positioning of main objects or characters. 

## 8 Conclusion 

In this work, we build on an emerging body of research to formal-ize OOPrompt as an interaction paradigm in which users compose prompts as structured and manipulable interactive objects. Through a formative study, we collected participant feedback to construct the 

OOPrompt design space, which was subsequently implemented as a functional prototype and validated in a second study. The findings suggest that while OOPrompt enhances clarity and efficiency in iterative, exploratory tasks through modular structure, it struggles with subjective opinion-forming and introduces extra steps that require greater automation to truly streamline the human-LLM workflow. Our work contributes theoretical and empirical guid-ance to the design and engineering of prompt-based, LLM-enabled interactive systems. OOPrompt: Reifying Intents into Structured Artifacts for Modular and Iterative Prompting 

## References 

[1] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Floren-cia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al . 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 

(2023). [2] Ian Arawjo, Chelse Swoopes, Priyan Vaithilingam, Martin Wattenberg, and Elena L. Glassman. 2024. ChainForge: A Visual Toolkit for Prompt Engineering and LLM Hypothesis Testing. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 304, 18 pages. doi:10.1145/ 3613904.3642016 [3] James Betker, Gabriel Goh, Li Jing, Tim Brooks, Jianfeng Wang, Linjie Li, Long Ouyang, Juntang Zhuang, Joyce Lee, Yufei Guo, et al . 2023. Improving im-age generation with better captions. Computer Science. https://cdn. openai. com/papers/dall-e-3. pdf 2, 3 (2023), 8. [4] Grady Booch, Robert Maksimchuk, Michael Engle, Bobbi Young, Jim Conallen, and Kelli Houston. 2007. Object-Oriented Analysis and Design with Applications 

(3rd ed.). Addison-Wesley Professional. [5] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2021. Thematic analysis: A practical guide. (2021). [6] Yuzhe Cai, Shaoguang Mao, Wenshan Wu, Zehua Wang, Yaobo Liang, Tao Ge, Chenfei Wu, Wang You, Ting Song, Yan Xia, Jonathan Tien, Nan Duan, and Furu Wei. 2024. Low-code LLM: Graphical User Interface over Large Language Models. arXiv:2304.08103 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.08103 [7] Xiang’Anthony Chen, Tiffany Knearem, and Yang Li. 2025. The GenUI Study: Exploring the Design of Generative UI Tools to Support UX Practitioners and Beyond. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference .1179–1196. [8] Ian Drosos, Jack Williams, Advait Sarkar, and Nicholas Wilson. 2024. Dynamic Prompt Middleware: Contextual Prompt Refinement Controls for Comprehension Tasks. arXiv:2412.02357 [cs.HC] https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.02357 [9] Evans Xu Han, Alice Qian Zhang, Haiyi Zhu, Hong Shen, Paul Pu Liang, and Jane Hsieh. 2025. POET: Supporting Prompting Creativity and Personalization with Automated Expansion of Text-to-Image Generation. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology . 1–18. [10] Hilary Hutchinson, Wendy Mackay, Bo Westerlund, Benjamin B Bederson, Al-lison Druin, Catherine Plaisant, Michel Beaudouin-Lafon, Stéphane Conversy, Helen Evans, Heiko Hansen, et al . 2003. Technology probes: inspiring design for and with families. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . 17–24. [11] Peiling Jiang, Jude Rayan, Steven P. Dow, and Haijun Xia. 2023. Graphologue: Exploring Large Language Model Responses with Interactive Diagrams. In Pro-ceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (San Francisco, CA, USA) (UIST ’23) . Association for Computing Ma-chinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 3, 20 pages. doi:10.1145/3586183.3606737 [12] Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F Xu, Jun Araki, and Graham Neubig. 2020. How can we know what language models know? Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 8 (2020), 423–438. [13] Ishika Joshi, Simra Shahid, Shreeya Venneti, Manushree Vasu, Yantao Zheng, Yunyao Li, Balaji Krishnamurthy, and Gromit Yeuk-Yin Chan. 2024. CoPrompter: User-Centric Evaluation of LLM Instruction Alignment for Improved Prompt Engineering. arXiv:2411.06099 [cs.HC] https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.06099 [14] Tushar Khot, Harsh Trivedi, Matthew Finlayson, Yao Fu, Kyle Richardson, Pe-ter Clark, and Ashish Sabharwal. 2023. Decomposed Prompting: A Modu-lar Approach for Solving Complex Tasks. arXiv:2210.02406 [cs.CL] https: //arxiv.org/abs/2210.02406 [15] Soomin Kim, Jinsu Eun, Yoobin Elyson Park, Kwangwon Lee, Gyuho Lee, and Joonhwan Lee. 2025. PromptPilot: Exploring User Experience of Prompting with AI-Enhanced Initiative in LLMs. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction (2025), 1–23. arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2025.2489030 doi:10.1080/10447318.2025.2489030 [16] Tae Soo Kim, Yoonjoo Lee, Minsuk Chang, and Juho Kim. 2023. Cells, Gen-erators, and Lenses: Design Framework for Object-Oriented Interaction with Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (San Francisco, CA, USA) (UIST ’23) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 4, 18 pages. doi:10.1145/3586183.3606833 [17] Tae Soo Kim, Yoonjoo Lee, Jamin Shin, Young-Ho Kim, and Juho Kim. 2024. Evallm: Interactive evaluation of large language model prompts on user-defined criteria. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–21. [18] Jiahui Li and Roman Klinger. 2025. iPrOp: Interactive Prompt Optimization for Large Language Models with a Human in the Loop. arXiv:2412.12644 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12644 [19] Xiaoqiang Lin, Zhongxiang Dai, Arun Verma, See-Kiong Ng, Patrick Jaillet, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. 2024. Prompt Optimization with Human Feedback. arXiv:2405.17346 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.17346 [20] Michael Xieyang Liu, Frederick Liu, Alexander J. Fiannaca, Terry Koo, Lucas Dixon, Michael Terry, and Carrie J. Cai. 2024. “We Need Structured Output”: To-wards User-centered Constraints on Large Language Model Output. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’24) . ACM, 1–9. doi:10.1145/3613905.3650756 [21] Yuhan Liu, Michael JQ Zhang, and Eunsol Choi. 2025. User feedback in human-LLM dialogues: a lens to understand users but noisy as a learning signal. In 

Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . 2666–2681. [22] Huan Ma, Changqing Zhang, Yatao Bian, Lemao Liu, Zhirui Zhang, Peilin Zhao, Shu Zhang, Huazhu Fu, Qinghua Hu, and Bingzhe Wu. 2023. Fairness-guided Few-shot Prompting for Large Language Models. arXiv:2303.13217 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.13217 [23] Qianou Ma, Weirui Peng, Hua Shen, Kenneth Koedinger, and Tongshuang Wu. 2024. What you say= what you want? Teaching humans to articulate require-ments for LLMs. [24] Qianou Ma, Weirui Peng, Chenyang Yang, Hua Shen, Ken Koedinger, and Tong-shuang Wu. 2025. What should we engineer in prompts? training humans in requirement-driven llm use. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 

32, 4 (2025), 1–27. [25] Wendy E. Mackay and Anne-Laure Fayard. 1997. HCI, natural science and design: a framework for triangulation across disciplines. In Proceedings of the 2nd Conference on Designing Interactive Systems: Processes, Practices, Methods, and Techniques (Amsterdam, The Netherlands) (DIS ’97) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 223–234. doi:10.1145/263552.263612 [26] Yuetian Mao, Junjie He, and Chunyang Chen. 2025. From Prompts to Tem-plates: A Systematic Prompt Template Analysis for Real-world LLMapps. arXiv:2504.02052 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.02052 [27] Damien Masson, Sylvain Malacria, Géry Casiez, and Daniel Vogel. 2024. Direct-gpt: A direct manipulation interface to interact with large language models. In 

Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .1–16. [28] Aditi Mishra, Utkarsh Soni, Anjana Arunkumar, Jinbin Huang, Bum Chul Kwon, and Chris Bryan. 2025. PromptAid: Prompt Exploration, Perturba-tion, Testing and Iteration using Visual Analytics for Large Language Models. arXiv:2304.01964 [cs.HC] https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.01964 [29] Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2022. Reframing instructional prompts to gptk’s language. In Findings of the association for computational linguistics: ACL 2022 . 589–612. [30] Don Norman. 2013. The design of everyday things: Revised and expanded edition .Basic books. [31] Savvas Petridis, Michael Terry, and Carrie Jun Cai. 2023. Promptinfuser: Bringing user interface mock-ups to life with large language models. In Extended Abstracts of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–6. [32] Nicholas Polys, Ayat Mohammed, and Ben Sandbrook. 2024. Prompt Engineering for X3D Object Creation with LLMs. In Proceedings of the 29th International ACM Conference on 3D Web Technology (Guimarães, Portugal) (Web3D ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 18, 7 pages. doi:10.1145/ 3665318.3677159 [33] Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. 2022. Hierarchical Text-Conditional Image Generation with CLIP Latents. arXiv:2204.06125 [cs.CV] https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.06125 [34] Laria Reynolds and Kyle McDonell. 2021. Prompt programming for large language models: Beyond the few-shot paradigm. In Extended abstracts of the 2021 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–7. [35] Nathalie Riche, Anna Offenwanger, Frederic Gmeiner, David Brown, Hugo Romat, Michel Pahud, Nicolai Marquardt, Kori Inkpen, and Ken Hinckley. 2025. AI-Instruments: Embodying Prompts as Instruments to Abstract & Reflect Graphical Interface Commands as General-Purpose Tools. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . ACM, 1–18. doi:10. 1145/3706598.3714259 [36] Rupak Sarkar, Bahareh Sarrafzadeh, Nirupama Chandrasekaran, Nagu Rangan, Philip Resnik, Longqi Yang, and Sujay Kumar Jauhar. 2025. Conversational user-ai intervention: A study on prompt rewriting for improved llm response generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.16789 (2025). [37] Sander Schulhoff, Michael Ilie, Nishant Balepur, Konstantine Kahadze, Amanda Liu, Chenglei Si, Yinheng Li, Aayush Gupta, HyoJung Han, Sevien Schul-hoff, Pranav Sandeep Dulepet, Saurav Vidyadhara, Dayeon Ki, Sweta Agrawal, Chau Pham, Gerson Kroiz, Feileen Li, Hudson Tao, Ashay Srivastava, Hevan-der Da Costa, Saloni Gupta, Megan L. Rogers, Inna Goncearenco, Giuseppe Sarli, Igor Galynker, Denis Peskoff, Marine Carpuat, Jules White, Shyamal Anad-kat, Alexander Hoyle, and Philip Resnik. 2025. The Prompt Report: A Sys-tematic Survey of Prompt Engineering Techniques. arXiv:2406.06608 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.06608 [38] L. Shen, H. Li, Y. Wang, X. Xie, and H. Qu. 2025. Prompting Generative AI with Interaction-Augmented Instructions. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, 1–9. Xu et al. 

[39] Shneiderman. 1983. Direct Manipulation: A Step Beyond Programming Lan-guages. Computer 16, 8 (1983), 57–69. doi:10.1109/MC.1983.1654471 [40] Hari Subramonyam, Roy Pea, Christopher Pondoc, Maneesh Agrawala, and Colleen Seifert. 2024. Bridging the gulf of envisioning: Cognitive challenges in prompt based interactions with llms. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–19. [41] Sangho Suh, Meng Chen, Bryan Min, Toby Jia-Jun Li, and Haijun Xia. 2024. Luminate: Structured Generation and Exploration of Design Space with Large Language Models for Human-AI Co-Creation. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 644, 26 pages. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642400 [42] Sangho Suh, Bryan Min, Srishti Palani, and Haijun Xia. 2023. Sensecape: En-abling Multilevel Exploration and Sensemaking with Large Language Models. In 

Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’23) . ACM, 1–18. doi:10.1145/3586183.3606756 [43] Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, Katie Millican, et al . 2023. Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805 (2023). [44] Ming Wang, Yuanzhong Liu, Xiaoyu Liang, Songlian Li, Yijie Huang, Xiaoming Zhang, Sijia Shen, Chaofeng Guan, Daling Wang, Shi Feng, Huaiwen Zhang, Yifei Zhang, Minghui Zheng, and Chi Zhang. 2024. LangGPT: Rethinking Structured Reusable Prompt Design Framework for LLMs from the Programming Language. arXiv:2402.16929 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.16929 [45] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. 2023. Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models. arXiv:2201.11903 [cs.CL] https: //arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903 [46] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, Ryen W White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. 2023. AutoGen: Enabling Next-Gen LLM Applications via Multi-Agent Conversation. arXiv:2308.08155 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.08155 [47] Tongshuang Wu, Ellen Jiang, Aaron Donsbach, Jeff Gray, Alejandra Molina, Michael Terry, and Carrie J Cai. 2022. PromptChainer: Chaining Large Language Model Prompts through Visual Programming. In Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA) 

(CHI EA ’22) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 359, 10 pages. doi:10.1145/3491101.3519729 [48] Tongshuang Wu, Michael Terry, and Carrie Jun Cai. 2022. AI Chains: Transpar-ent and Controllable Human-AI Interaction by Chaining Large Language Model Prompts. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput-ing Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA) (CHI ’22) . Association for Computing Ma-chinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 385, 22 pages. doi:10.1145/3491102.3517582 [49] Haijun Xia, Bruno Araujo, Tovi Grossman, and Daniel Wigdor. 2016. Object-Oriented Drawing. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (San Jose, California, USA) (CHI ’16) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 4610–4621. doi:10.1145/2858036. 2858075 [50] Jinyu Xiang, Jiayi Zhang, Zhaoyang Yu, Xinbing Liang, Fengwei Teng, Jinhao Tu, Fashen Ren, Xiangru Tang, Sirui Hong, Chenglin Wu, and Yuyu Luo. 2025. Self-Supervised Prompt Optimization. arXiv:2502.06855 [cs.CL] https://arxiv. org/abs/2502.06855 [51] Xiaotong Xu, Jiayu Yin, Catherine Gu, Jenny Mar, Sydney Zhang, Jane L E, and Steven P Dow. 2024. Jamplate: Exploring llm-enhanced templates for idea reflection. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces . 907–921. [52] J.D. Zamfirescu-Pereira, Richmond Y. Wong, Bjoern Hartmann, and Qian Yang. 2023. Why Johnny Can’t Prompt: How Non-AI Experts Try (and Fail) to Design LLM Prompts. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Hamburg, Germany) (CHI ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 437, 21 pages. doi:10.1145/3544548. 3581388 [53] Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. 2023. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF inter-national conference on computer vision . 3836–3847. [54] Zhongyi Zhou, Jing Jin, Vrushank Phadnis, Xiuxiu Yuan, Jun Jiang, Xun Qian, Kristen Wright, Mark Sherwood, Jason Mayes, Jingtao Zhou, Yiyi Huang, Zheng Xu, Yinda Zhang, Johnny Lee, Alex Olwal, David Kim, Ram Iyengar, Na Li, and Ruofei Du. 2025. InstructPipe: Generating Visual Blocks Pipelines with Human Instructions and LLMs. arXiv:2312.09672 [cs.HC] doi:10.1145/3706598.3713905