Title: Cascaded Batch Prompting

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.27038v1

Published Time: Fri, 28 Aug 2026 00:59:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Cascaded Batch Prompting 

Sho Hoshino and Peinan Zhang 

CyberAgent 

{hoshino_sho,zhang_peinan}@cyberagent.co.jp 

Abstract 

Although batch prompting makes large lan-guage model inference more efficient by pro-cessing multiple instances simultaneously, it suffers from unpredictable downstream task performance. We propose cascaded batch prompting , a two-stage approach designed to re-solve the unpredictability of conventional batch prompting by disentangling complex reason-ing from symbol grounding. Experiments on multiple-choice question answering and natural language inference demonstrate that the pro-posed method outperforms the standard single prompting baseline while achieving a speedup proportional to batch size, establishing a new state of the art on the Pareto frontier. 

1 Introduction 

Batch prompting is a prominent technique for mak-ing large language model (LLM) inference efficient by processing multiple instances simultaneously within a single context (Cheng et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2024). However, accommodating multiple instances requires formatting modifications that can alter generated outputs. Consequently, prior studies observe that batching can unexpectedly improve or even degrade downstream task performance, in-troducing a critical bottleneck of unpredictability. This unpredictability often limits the real-world ap-plication of batch prompting at scale by forcing an undesirable choice between inference speedup and the risk of degraded performance. We hypothesize this unpredictability of conven-tional batch prompting is not inherent to batching itself, but it results from conflating distinct cogni-tive tasks into a single step. Specifically, classifi-cation tasks impose strict output constraints that force the model to simultaneously perform: (i) the complex reasoning required to arrive at a solution, and (ii) the procedural task of symbol grounding that solution in a constrained output format. While the benefit of disentangling these tasks has been Batch Prompting Q1: Who wrote Clair de Lune? • A. Chopin • B. Debussy • C. Ravel           

> Q2: Who composed Gymnopédie? • A. Bartók • B. Cage • C. None of the above
> A1 :B. (Debussy)
> A2 :A. (Bartók)
> Both reasoning & symbol grounding
> Cascaded Batch Prompting Q1: Who wrote Clair de Lune? • Chopin • Debussy • Ravel
> Q2: Who composed Gymnopédie? • Bartók • Cage • None of the above
> A1 :Debussy
> A2 :Satie
> Q: Which matches Debussy ? • A. Chopin • B. Debussy • C. Ravel
> A: B. (Debussy)
> Q: Which matches Satie ? • A. Bartók • B. Cage • C. None of the above
> A: C. (Satie)
> Stage (i): reasoning Stage (ii): symbol grounding

Figure 1: Cascaded batch prompting (top) disentan-gles reasoning from symbol grounding into a two-stage process, while conventional batch prompting (bottom) handles both in one step. 

demonstrated for single prompting (Wang et al., 2024a,b), we argue that under the pressure of batch processing, the cognitive load of this conflation becomes particularly problematic. To test this hypothesis, we propose cascaded batch prompting , a novel two-stage approach that disentangles reasoning from symbol grounding in the batching context (Figure 1). Instead of forcing the LLM to generate the final constrained output directly, our method proceeds as follows: (i) a rea-soning stage that prompts the LLM to answer the question in a free-form manner, and (ii) a symbol grounding stage that provides the LLM with its own generated answer and asks it to map that an-swer to the corresponding constrained output. This 1arXiv:2608.27038v1 [cs.CL] 27 Aug 2026 task decomposition allows the LLM to handle each sub-task more effectively. We evaluate our method on the diverse and chal-lenging classification tasks of multiple-choice ques-tion answering (MCQA; Balepur et al., 2025) and natural language inference (NLI; Bowman et al., 2015). Experiments demonstrate that cascaded batch prompting outperforms the single prompt-ing baseline while maintaining speed proportional to batch size. These results indicate that the pro-posed method successfully resolves the cognitive bottleneck driving the unpredictability, establishing a new state of the art on the Pareto frontier. 

2 Prompting Methodology 

We formally define the prompting strategies for classification tasks, including MCQA and NLI. 

2.1 Problem Definition 

A classification task instance consists of an input x

and a set of class labels. The desired output is the answer a, which indicates the correct class label. This answer can be represented by a symbol s (e.g., “A.”) or its corresponding class label name n (e.g., “entailment”). For any given task, there exists a de-terministic function g : s 7 → n that maps a symbol to its name. Since this mapping is one-to-one, gen-erating either s or n is sufficient to determine the final answer. We use a to denote a comprehensive answer format that may include both the symbol and its name (e.g., “A. entailment”). We denote a call to an LLM as a function GX→Y ,which maps an input from space X to an output in space Y . To handle multiple instances efficiently, this function can operate on a batch of inputs, de-noted by bold letters (e.g., x). 

2.2 Single Prompting 

The standard approach is single prompting , where the LLM is prompted to predict the answer for a single instance x. Depending on the desired output format, this leads to three variants (Robinson and Wingate, 2023): End-to-End: ˆa = Gx→a(x), (1a) Multiple Choice: ˆs = Gx→s(x), (1b) Cloze: ˆn = Gx→n(x). (1c) In the Multiple Choice variant, the class label name can be recovered deterministically (i.e., ˆn = g(ˆ s)). In the Cloze variant, however, mapping the free-form output back to a symbol is a non-trivial step (Wang et al., 2024a,b). While single prompting can be accurate, processing instances one by one is slow. 

2.3 Conventional Batch Prompting 

To improve throughput, conventional batch prompt-ing processes a batch of inputs x simultaneously. Consequently, the three variants are extended ac-cordingly: End-to-End: ˆa = Gx→a(x), (2a) Multiple Choice: ˆs = Gx→s(x), (2b) Cloze: ˆn = Gx→n(x). (2c) However, prior studies observe that its performance can be unpredictable and may suffer from degrada-tion when batched (Cheng et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2024). 

2.4 Cascaded Batch Prompting 

We propose cascaded batch prompting , a two-stage approach that disentangles the complex reasoning from the simple symbol grounding as follows. 

Reasoning. First, the LLM is prompted to gen-erate the class label name ˆn for a batch of inputs 

x. This stage allows the model to focus entirely on reasoning: 

ˆn = Gx→n(x). (3) 

Symbol Grounding. Second, the batch of gen-erated class label names ˆn is provided as input to another LLM prompt, which maps each class label name to its corresponding symbol ˆs:

ˆs = Gn→s(ˆ n).1 (4) The complete cascaded process is a composition of these two steps, expressed as: 

ˆs = Gn→s(Gx→n(x)) . (5) By separating the generation process, we hypothe-size that the LLM can handle each sub-task more effectively, thereby overcoming the limitations of conventional batch prompting.   

> 1We also supply xas additional context to improve perfor-mance, though we confirmed it is not strictly necessary. For this symbol grounding stage, we processed each instance indi-vidually via single prompting; we found this approach robust for this procedural task, and the computational overhead was minimal in our experiments.

2Accuracy (%) ↑                              

> Prompt Batch Size MMLU MNLI-m GPT-4.1 Single –84.39 82.19 Batch 32 85.51 86.14 ∗
> Cascaded Batch 32 86.81 ∗85.09 GPT-4.1-MINI
> Single –80.12 82.60 Batch 32 81.88 85.60 Cascaded Batch 32 82.96 ∗86.20 ∗
> PHI -4 Single –74.34 82.15 Batch 32 58.35 83.19 Cascaded Batch 32 77.18 ∗83.57

Table 1: Comparison of various prompting strategies. For a fair comparison, we chose the batch size of 32 that performed best for the conventional batch prompting baseline. Bold text highlights the highest scores. The asterisk ( ∗) denotes statistical significance ( p < 0.05 ,detailed in Appendix A). 

3 Experiments 

We evaluate various prompting strategies using the challenging tasks of MCQA and NLI, configured as follows. 2

3.1 Setup Data. We use the Massive Multitask Language Understanding (MMLU; Hendrycks et al., 2021) dataset for MCQA and the Multi-Genre Natu-ral Language Inference (MNLI; Williams et al., 2018) dataset for NLI. We selected these bench-marks because they are commonly used in popular LLM benchmarks, including BIG-bench (Srivas-tava et al., 2023) and HELM (Liang et al., 2023). 

Metrics. We report classification accuracy, the standard metric used for MCQA and NLI. 

LLMs. We primarily use GPT-4.1 and its smaller variant GPT-4.1-mini (OpenAI et al., 2024) with batch sizes varying from 1 to 128 to assess perfor-mance robustness across model and batch scales. We additionally use open-weight Phi-4 (Abdin et al., 2024). We employ nucleus sampling (Holtz-man et al., 2020) with top-p=0.9, without changing other hyperparameters unless explicitly mentioned. 

3.2 Main Results 

Table 1 presents our main results. Across all three models, our cascaded batch prompting achieves the                             

> 2We provide full implementation details, including hyper-parameters and data splitting, in Appendix A. 124816 32 64 128 70 75 80 85 90
> GPT-4.1 Accuracy (%) MMLU test
> 124816 32 64 128 70 75 80 85 90
> MNLI-m test
> 124816 32 64 128 70 75 80 85 90
> Batch Size GPT-4.1-mini Accuracy (%)
> 124816 32 64 128 70 75 80 85 90
> Batch Size Cascaded Batch Batch Single

Figure 2: Accuracy scaling with batch size. Cas-caded batch prompting demonstrates robust perfor-mance across tasks and models. Its advantage is most pronounced with GPT-4.1-mini (bottom row), where it consistently outperforms the baselines. 

highest accuracy on both MMLU (86.81%) and MNLI (86.20%). With GPT-4.1, cascaded batch prompting obtains the top score on MMLU. On MNLI, however, conventional batch prompting per-forms slightly better. We attribute this to the fact that the NLI task inherently lacks a free-form out-put space (i.e., it only requires a predefined sym-bolic word such as “entailment”), making the ad-ditional symbol grounding step less critical for a more powerful model. Nevertheless, the advantage of our approach is underscored with GPT-4.1-mini and Phi-4, where cascaded batch prompting is the best performer on both tasks, which suggests our method is most beneficial when models face higher cognitive loads. These results support our core claim that disentangling reasoning from symbol grounding is a robust strategy that consistently im-proves upon single prompting. 

3.3 Scalability Analysis 

Figure 2 shows that cascaded batch prompting’s accuracy remains robust as batch size increases. In contrast, conventional batch prompting’s per-formance is less consistent, and can underperform the single prompting baseline (e.g., with Phi-4 on MMLU). This result confirms that our method ef-fectively leverages batching’s efficiency without sacrificing accuracy. A closer inspection of Figure 2 reveals a slight degradation in performance for both batch methods at the largest batch size of 128. We attribute this 350 100 150 84 85 86 87 

Throughput (instances/sec) GPT-4.1 Accuracy (%) MMLU test Cascaded Batch Batch Single Figure 3: Compared with single prompting, cascaded batch prompting achieves higher accuracy and through-put at the same time, establishing a new Pareto frontier. Meanwhile, conventional batch prompting underper-forms, demonstrating its unpredictability. 

not to a decline in reasoning capability but rather to a mechanical artifact of processing batches, where the model may occasionally fail to produce a cor-responding output for every input instance. This can result in a mismatch between the number of input and output lines. A simple sanity check can identify and rerun the affected instances to rectify these issues (detailed in Section 3.6). For the clar-ity of our analysis, however, we did not include these post hoc corrections in our main results. 

3.4 Runtime Analysis 

Figure 3 visualizes the trade-off between accu-racy and instance-level throughput (instances/sec). While single prompting offers high accuracy at low speed, conventional batch prompting excels at speed while suffering from unpredictable perfor-mance, even underperforming the single prompting baseline. Our cascaded approach resolves this un-predictability, establishing a new Pareto frontier by achieving higher accuracy and throughput at the same time. 

3.5 Ablation Study 

To isolate the effect of our two-stage design from the effects of batching, we conducted an ablation study comparing standard single prompting with cascaded single prompting (Wang et al., 2024a,b). As shown in Figure 4, cascaded single prompting consistently outperforms its standard counterpart across both MMLU and MNLI. This result suggests Single Cascaded Single        

> 50 75 100 84 .39 85 .85
> GPT-4.1 Accuracy (%) MMLU test Single Cascaded Single
> 50 75 100 82 .19 84 .53
> MNLI-m test Single Cascaded Single
> 50 75 100 80 .12 81 .84
> GPT-4.1-mini Accuracy (%) Single Cascaded Single
> 50 75 100 82 .685 .31

Figure 4: Cascaded single prompting outperforms the conventional baseline, demonstrating the effectiveness of the two-stage design even without batching. 

that the performance benefit is not solely due to batching but is fundamentally rooted in the task decomposition itself. 

3.6 Sanity Check 

As discussed in Section 3.3, we can also add a simple sanity check during batch prompting infer-ence to verify if the number of outputs matches the number of inputs. Implementing this sanity check prevents a single missing generation from misalign-ing all subsequent answers in the batch. This sanity check can be applied to both conventional and cas-caded batch prompting and is therefore orthogonal. Table 2 reports preliminary results using GPT-4.1-mini and the MMLU test set. While this op-tional and simple step cannot fully resolve the per-formance decline as batch size increases, it suc-cessfully mitigates input and output misalignment. However, the resulting performance improvement is slight and not statistically significant. 

3.7 Cost Analysis 

Table 3 reports the inference cost in terms of token-level throughput (tokens/sec) on the MMLU test set using GPT-4.1, distinct from the instance-level throughput discussed in Section 3.4. Since cas-caded batch prompting requires an additional in-ference stage, it processes more tokens overall, re-sulting in a higher token-level throughput and a cost approximately 1.2 times higher than that of conventional batch prompting. We emphasize that this modest overhead is a necessary trade-off to resolve the unpredictability of conventional batch prompting. 4Accuracy (%) ↑       

> Prompt Batch Size MMLU GPT-4.1-MINI
> Cascaded Batch w/o Sanity Check 32 82.96
> 128 81.41 w/ Sanity Check 128 81.61

Table 2: Impact of the sanity check on cascaded batch prompting. The sanity check partially recovers perfor-mance lost to input and output misalignment, although it cannot fully resolve the performance decline at larger batch sizes.              

> Throughput (tokens/sec) ↓
> MMLU Prompt Batch Size Input Output GPT-4.1 Single –4,910 47 Batch 32 18,990 965 Cascaded Batch 32 23,341 1,220

Table 3: Cascaded batch prompting introduces a modest cost overhead due to the additional symbol grounding stage. 

4 Discussion 

Our experiments have demonstrated the empirical advantages of cascaded batch prompting. We now turn to a discussion of the underlying mechanisms that drive its effectiveness and the broader implica-tions of task decomposition. 

Cognitive Division of Labor. We attribute the effectiveness of our method to a cognitive divi-sion of labor, analogous to Adam Smith’s “pin factory” (Smith, 1776). Our cascaded approach separates the process into a reasoning stage for problem-solving and a symbol grounding stage for procedural formatting. 

Pragmatic Value of Task Decomposition. 

While developing end-to-end LLMs is a promi-nent research goal, our results show the pragmatic value of task decomposition. Since current models can struggle with the combined cognitive load of reasoning and symbol grounding under batch pres-sure, principled decomposition remains a critical and effective strategy. 

5 Conclusion 

In this study, we identified that the unpredictabil-ity of conventional batch prompting results from conflating distinct cognitive tasks into a single step. To address this, we proposed cascaded batch prompting, a two-stage approach that disentangles complex reasoning from simple symbol ground-ing, thereby resolving this unpredictability. Ex-periments demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms the single prompting baseline while achieving a speedup proportional to batch size. While our experiments focused on multiple-choice question answering and natural language inference, the core principle extends to a wide range of classi-fication tasks where a model’s free-form reasoning must be mapped to a constrained output format. 

Limitations 

Task Applicability. Our evaluation intentionally focuses on classification tasks to provide a con-trolled setting for validating the disentanglement of reasoning from symbol grounding. To extend this two-stage approach to the challenges of open-ended generation, future work can investigate in-tegrating methods like universal self-consistency (Chen et al., 2024). 

Inference Overhead. The proposed cascaded batch prompting uses a two-stage inference pro-cess that adds overhead compared to conventional single-stage prompting (detailed in Section 3.7). For a dataset of size N and a batch size of b, con-ventional batch prompting requires N/b inference calls. In contrast, our implementation requires N/b 

calls for the batched reasoning stage plus an addi-tional N individual calls for the unbatched symbol grounding stage. We consider this overhead a nec-essary trade-off to resolve the unpredictability of conventional batch prompting and therefore worth-while. 

References 

Marah Abdin, Jyoti Aneja, Harkirat Behl, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Suriya Gunasekar, Michael Harrison, Russell J. Hewett, Mojan Javaheripi, Piero Kauffmann, James R. Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Weishung Liu, Caio C. T. Mendes, Anh Nguyen, Eric Price, Gustavo de Rosa, Olli Saarikivi, and 8 others. 2024. Phi-4 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2412.08905. Nishant Balepur, Rachel Rudinger, and Jordan Lee Boyd-Graber. 2025. Which of these best describes multiple choice evaluation with LLMs? A) forced B) flawed C) fixable D) all of the above. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 3394–3418. 

5Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts, and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large anno-tated corpus for learning natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 632–642. Xinyun Chen, Renat Aksitov, Uri Alon, Jie Ren, Kefan Xiao, Pengcheng Yin, Sushant Prakash, Charles Sut-ton, Xuezhi Wang, and Denny Zhou. 2024. Universal self-consistency for large language models. In ICML 2024 Workshop on In-Context Learning .Zhoujun Cheng, Jungo Kasai, and Tao Yu. 2023. Batch prompting: Efficient inference with large language model APIs. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing: Industry Track , pages 792–810. Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2021. Measuring massive multitask language under-standing. In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Learning Representations .Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. 2020. The curious case of neural text degeneration. In Proceedings of the Eighth Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .Philipp Koehn. 2004. Statistical significance tests for machine translation evaluation. In Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 388–395. Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Yian Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Ku-mar, Benjamin Newman, Binhang Yuan, Bobby Yan, Ce Zhang, Christian Cosgrove, Christopher D Man-ning, Christopher Re, Diana Acosta-Navas, Drew A. Hudson, and 31 others. 2023. Holistic evaluation of language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Jianzhe Lin, Maurice Diesendruck, Liang Du, and Robin Abraham. 2024. BatchPrompt: Accomplish more with less. In Proceedings of the Twelveth In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations ,pages 21590–21612. OpenAI, :, Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P. Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, Aleksander M ˛ adry, Alex Baker-Whitcomb, Alex Beutel, Alex Borzunov, Alex Carney, Alex Chow, Alex Kirillov, and 401 others. 2024. GPT-4o system card. Preprint , arXiv:2410.21276. Joshua Robinson and David Wingate. 2023. Leveraging large language models for multiple choice question answering. In Proceedings of the Eleventh Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .Adam Smith. 1776. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations , Project Gutenberg ebook edition. W. Strahan and T. Cadell, London. Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam Fisch, Adam R. Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Agnieszka Kluska, Aitor Lewkowycz, Akshat Agarwal, Alethea Power, Alex Ray, Alex Warstadt, Alexander W. Kocurek, Ali Safaya, Ali Tazarv, and 431 others. 2023. Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Xinpeng Wang, Chengzhi Hu, Bolei Ma, Paul Rottger, and Barbara Plank. 2024a. Look at the text: Instruction-tuned language models are more robust multiple choice selectors than you think. In Proceed-ings of the First Conference on Language Modeling .Xinpeng Wang, Bolei Ma, Chengzhi Hu, Leon Weber-Genzel, Paul Röttger, Frauke Kreuter, Dirk Hovy, and Barbara Plank. 2024b. “My Answer is C”: First-token probabilities do not match text answers in instruction-tuned language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 7407–7416. Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman. 2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-tence understanding through inference. In Proceed-ings of the 2018 Conference of the North Ameri-can Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 1112–1122. 

6A Setup Details 

Data Splitting. For the MMLU dataset, we use the validation split for development and the test split for testing. For the MNLI dataset, similarly, we use the matched validation split for develop-ment and the matched test split for testing. 

Hyperparameters. We set max tokens to 20 for single prompting and 1,000 for other prompting strategies. 

Model Versions. We use GPT-4.1 version 2025-04-14 and GPT-4.1-mini version 2025-04-14 (Ope-nAI et al., 2024) with Phi-4 version 7 (Abdin et al., 2024). To maximize throughput, all calls to the LLM API were made asynchronously. 

Prompts. Figures 5, 6, and 7 list our prompts used for the tasks of MCQA and NLI. 

Statistical Testing. We assessed statistical signif-icance using paired bootstrap resampling (Koehn, 2004). The performance gains from cascaded batch prompting are statistically significant ( p < 0.05 )on the MMLU benchmark across the evaluated models. The performance gains on MNLI were mostly consistent in direction, but did not reach sta-tistical significance with Phi-4 and underperformed the conventional batch prompting baseline with GPT-4.1. This suggests limited gains on the NLI task as discussed in Section 3.2. 

Licenses. We performed experiments using the MMLU dataset (Hendrycks et al., 2021) re-leased under the MIT license 3, the MNLI dataset (Williams et al., 2018) available under a collection of licenses 4 5 , GPT-4.1 API (OpenAI et al., 2024) released under a proprietary license via Azure Ope-nAI Service 6, and Phi-4 (Abdin et al., 2024) re-leased under the MIT license 7. 

> 3https://huggingface.co/datasets/cais/mmlu
> 4The majority of the corpus is released under the OANC’s license. Data in the fiction section falls under several permis-sive licenses, including Creative Commons Share-Alike 3.0 Unported, Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported, and the public domain in the United States.
> 5https://huggingface.co/datasets/nyu-mll/ multi_nli
> 6https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/ ai-services/openai-service
> 7https://huggingface.co/microsoft/phi-4
> Stage (i): Reasoning Please read the multiple-choice question below carefully and select ONE of the listed options. Provide only the answers. Keep them as short as possible. Do not output anything else after that. Note: The number of answers should be the same as the number of the questions. Question[1]: {question} Options[1]: {options} Question[2]: {question} Options[2]: {options} ... Example: Answer[1]: X. Answer[2]: X. ... Answer: Stage (ii): Symbol Grounding Given a question, a list of options, and an answer, select the one option that matches the answer. Provide only the symbols and do not output anything else after that. Question: {question} Options: {options} Potential Answer: {answer} Answer:

Figure 5: Listing cascaded batch prompts used in the MCQA task. The placeholders “{question}”, “{op-tions}”, and “{answer}” are replaced with the actual question, its options, and LLM answer. 

7Stage (i): Reasoning Given a premise and a hypothesis, what is the semantic relation between them? Provide only the answers. Keep them as short as possible. Do not output anything else after that. Note: The number of answers should be the same as the number of the questions. Premise[1]: {premise} Hypothesis[1]: {hypothesis} Options[1]: - entailment - neutral - contradiction Premise[2]: {premise} Hypothesis[2]: {hypothesis} Options[2]: ... Example: Answer[1]: X. Answer[2]: X. ... Answer: Stage (ii): Symbol Grounding Given a question, a list of options, and an answer, select the one option that matches the answer. Provide only the symbols and do not output anything else after that. Question: Given a premise and a hypothesis, what is the semantic relation between them? Premise[1]: {premise} Hypothesis[1]: {hypothesis} Options: A. entailment B. neutral C. contradiction Potential Answer: {answer} Answer: 

Figure 6: Listing cascaded batch prompts used in the NLI task. The placeholders “{premise}”, “{hypoth-esis}”, and “{answer}” are replaced with the actual premise, hypothesis, and LLM answer. 

Conventional Batch Prompting for MCQA Please read the multiple-choice question below carefully and select ONE of the listed options. Provide only the symbols and do not output anything else after that. Note: The number of answers should be the same as the number of the questions. Question[1]: {question} Options[1]: {options} Question[2]: {question} Options[2]: {options} ... Example: Answer[1]: X. Answer[2]: X. ... Answer: Conventional Batch Prompting for NLI Given a premise and a hypothesis, what is the semantic relation between them? Provide only the symbols and do not output anything else after that. Note: The number of answers should be the same as the number of the questions. Premise[1]: {premise} Hypothesis[1]: {hypothesis} Options[1]: A. entailment B. neutral C. contradiction Premise[2]: {premise} Hypothesis[2]: {hypothesis} Options[2]: ... Example: Answer[1]: X. Answer[2]: X. ... Answer: 

Figure 7: Listing conventional batch prompts used in the MCQA and NLI tasks, respectively. Unlike cascaded batch, these prompts are tailored with symbol grounding in mind. 

8