Title: VISA: Agentic Self-Evolving Data Synthesis for Multimodal Instruction Following

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.26013v2

Published Time: Fri, 28 Aug 2026 00:35:19 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# VISA: Agentic Self-Evolving Data Synthesis for Multimodal Instruction Following 

Min Zeng, Guanxin Tan, Libin Cen, Yafei Wen Rui Hu , Liuyang Bian , Xiaolong Chen , Xiaoxin Chen 

vivo AI Lab 

> zengmin325@163.com

Abstract 

Multimodal instruction-following models re-quire training data that is accurate, diverse, verifiable, and challenging. Existing synthesis pipelines typically follow a one-pass generate-and-filter paradigm, discarding feedback from failed samples, verifier outcomes, and target-model errors. We present VISA (Visual In-struction Synthesis Agent), an agentic frame-work that reformulates multimodal instruction synthesis as a self-evolving loop. At each round, VISA analyzes an image to filter incom-patible constraints and discover new verifiable ones, samples diversity- and difficulty-aware constraint sets from persistent memory, gener-ates candidate instructions, and verifies the re-sulting samples with executable tools and struc-tured large language model judges. Failed sam-ples trigger diagnostic-guided recovery, while accepted samples are probed against the tar-get model to estimate difficulty. The result-ing verifier signals and target-model failure profiles are written back to memory, allow-ing subsequent rounds to adaptively expand the constraint space, reduce template repetition, and focus on unresolved model weaknesses. The same verifier contracts further provide re-ward signals for reinforcement learning with-out a separately trained reward model. Experi-ments on MM-IFEval show that VISA consis-tently improves multimodal instruction follow-ing over strong baselines, while preserving gen-eral multimodal capability across seven public benchmarks. 

1 Introduction 

Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have achieved remarkable progress in visual understand-ing and reasoning abilities (Liu et al., 2023; Team, 2026; Bai et al., 2025; Li et al., 2024). Beyond perception, real-world applications increasingly re-quire MLLMs to precisely follow complex user in-structions under diverse constraints, such as output formatting, keyword inclusion, style control, struc-tured generation, and visually grounded reasoning (Zhou et al., 2023; Qian et al., 2025). Building MLLMs that can reliably satisfy such multimodal constraints has therefore become an important prob-lem for multimodal alignment and instruction tun-ing. Recent works improve multimodal instruction following by synthesizing constraint-rich data and designing specialized evaluation benchmarks (Ding et al., 2025; He et al., 2026). However, most syn-thesis pipelines are still one-pass systems. They generate instructions from templates or prompts, fil-ter the outputs, and then add the accepted samples to a training set. Feedback from failed samples, re-peated templates, missing verifiers, or target-model errors is often used only locally, if at all. As a result, the synthesis process lacks an agent loop: it does not reflect on its past outputs, update its internal state, or use that state to plan. In this paper, we present VISA (Visual In-struction Synthesis Agent), a self-evolving agentic framework that treats multimodal instruction syn-thesis as a closed-loop optimization problem rather than a one-shot generation task. At its core, VISA runs an agent loop between a planning and exe-cution stage, which composes image-grounded in-structions and generates responses, and a reflection stage, which evaluates each sample through a uni-fied dual-track verifier combining executable code tools and structured large language model (LLM) judges. When a sample fails verification, the loop triggers diagnostic-guided recovery; when it passes, the loop probes the target model to estimate dif-ficulty. Crucially, the outcomes of every itera-tion—accepted samples, constraint–verifier bind-ings, diversity statistics, and per-constraint failure rates—are written into a persistent memory that re-shapes the next round’s constraint sampling and in-struction planning. Through this iterative accumu-lation, VISA continuously steers synthesis toward arXiv:2608.26013v2 [cs.CL] 27 Aug 2026 data that is more accurate, more diverse, and more challenging to the current target model, without additional human annotation during self-evolution. Our contributions are three-fold: (1) We propose a self-evolving framework for multimodal instruc-tion data synthesis that turns static generation into an iterative feedback-driven process; (2) We intro-duce a unified verification and recovery framework that supports dynamic verifier binding, bounded agentic repair, and target-aware difficulty probing during synthesis, while naturally producing verifi-able reward signals that can be readily extended to reinforcement learning (RL); (3) We demonstrate through extensive experiments on multiple multi-modal instruction-following benchmarks that VISA consistently improves instruction adherence while preserving strong general multimodal capabilities. 

2 Related Work 

Existing multimodal instruction synthesis pipelines primarily scale data diversity and response quality through large-scale synthetic generation (Huang et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2024), with recent works such as MM-IFEngine (Ding et al., 2025) further in-troducing structured constraints and hybrid verifica-tion to improve instruction-following quality. Self-evolving approaches such as Self-Instruct (Wang et al., 2023), WizardLM (Xu et al., 2023), and MMEvol (Luo et al., 2025) improve instruction complexity through iterative rewriting or evolution-ary generation. However, all of these methods re-main fundamentally open-loop: they optimize what is generated but leave the synthesis process itself static, with no mechanism to adapt based on what the target model has yet to master. VISA instead treats synthesis as a closed-loop optimization pro-cess, where verification outcomes, difficulty sig-nals, and accumulated memory continuously re-shape subsequent rounds of data generation. Prior works on instruction-following evalua-tion (Zhou et al., 2023; Qian et al., 2025) demon-strate that many constraints admit precise program-matic verification—an insight VISA extends from evaluation into synthesis by binding each constraint to a verifier at generation time. Agentic LLM sys-tems (Yao et al., 2022; Hong et al., 2024; Qin et al., 2024) similarly decompose tasks into perception, planning, and execution stages, but typically oper-ate within isolated episodes without persistent state. VISA maintains a persistent memory across syn-thesis rounds, so that reflection outcomes directly reshape future planning rather than being discarded at the end of each episode. 

3 Method 

VISA casts multimodal instruction synthesis as a closed-loop process with four stages: Perception, Planning & Execution, Reflection, and Memory Update. As shown in Figure 1, each round gener-ates, verifies, and repairs candidate samples, then writes accepted samples and difficulty signals into persistent memory to guide the next round. 

3.1 Problem Formulation 

We frame synthesis as image-conditioned con-straint satisfaction. Given an image pool I and a dynamically evolving constraint-type registry 

T , VISA constructs a multimodal instruction-following dataset 

D = {(Ii, Q i, R i, C i, v i)}Ni=1 , (1) where Ii ∈ I is an input image, Qi is an instruction grounded in Ii, Ci ⊂ T is the set of constraints embedded in Qi, Ri is the corresponding response expected to satisfy every c ∈ Ci, and vi denotes the verification procedure—either a code-based verifier or a structured LLM judge—bound to the sample at synthesis time. The registry T is not fixed: new constraint types may be proposed and validated during Perception, allowing the synthesized data to expand beyond its initial scope without human annotation. 

3.2 Perception 

A fundamental limitation of static synthesis pipelines is that a hand-crafted constraint reg-istry, however carefully designed, cannot antici-pate every instruction requirement that naturally arises from a diverse image collection. The Per-ception stage addresses this by first analyzing each image with the synthesis model to identify which constraint types in T are meaningful for the current scene, returning a compatible sub-set SI ⊆ T by pruning types whose require-ments cannot be grounded in the visual content—a 

spatial_relation constraint, for instance, is se-mantically vacuous for a close-up portrait. Restrict-ing downstream planning to SI ensures that every selected constraint is both verifiable and visually meaningful, preventing the planner from compos-ing instructions that are technically valid but dis-connected from the image. 1 Perception   

> Filter i ncompatible
> constraints
> Discover new
> constraints
> Validate new constraint types
> Candidate
> constraint
> + verifier
> Sandbox
> validation
> Validated
> new types
> Input images
> 2Planning & Execution

𝑄 ∗ + 𝐶 ∗ → 𝑅 ∗                      

> Response generation
> Greedy diversity selection
> using embedding pool
> kcandidate instructions
> Memory -guided constraint
> sampling
> (coverage +difficulty)
> Persistent Memory
> Accepted samples
> Instruction
> embedding pool
> Difficulty profile
> Constraint
> & verifier
> (𝐼, 𝑄, 𝑅, 𝐶, 𝑉)
> (𝑄 1, 𝑄 2, 𝑄 3… )
> 3Reflection
> No Yes
> Dual -track verification
> Code tools LLM judges
> All pass?
> Uses the
> target model
> to generate
> an answer.
> Accepted sample
> (𝐼, 𝑄, 𝑅, 𝐶, 𝑉)
> Uses diagnostic
> feedback to
> choose a
> recovery strategy
> Agent
> loop
> Data flow
> Memory feedback
> Repair loo p
> Image IInstruction QResponse RConstraints CVerifier V
> 4
> Round tRound t+ 1
> Self -evolving across iterations

Figure 1: Overview of VISA. The framework iteratively performs perception, planning and execution, reflection, and memory update, allowing verifier feedback and target-model difficulty signals to guide subsequent synthesis rounds. 

Beyond filtering, the Perception stage actively encourages the synthesis model to propose con-straint types that are uniquely suited to each image, even when the current registry already provides adequate coverage. This image-driven discovery enriches the constraint space with fine-grained, vi-sually grounded requirements that a static registry would not express, directly improving the diversity of synthesized instructions. Each proposed type is paired with a candidate verification function and must pass a sandboxed validation test before ad-mission to T , ensuring that every newly discovered constraint remains reliably verifiable in subsequent iterations. 

3.3 Planning & Execution 

Given the image-compatible constraint subset SI , a naive planner would repeatedly sample similar con-straint combinations and generate near-duplicate instructions across iterations—a form of data ho-mogenization that limits the diversity and informa-tiveness of the training corpus. VISA addresses this by jointly managing diversity at two levels: the constraint level, guided by memory signals, and the instruction level, guided by embedding-space distance. Specifically, constraint sampling weights each type in SI by two signals maintained in persis-tent memory—a coverage signal that down-weights types already well-represented in the accepted cor-pus, and a difficulty signal that up-weights types whose constraints the target model has historically struggled to satisfy (derived from the difficulty probing described in reflection)—concentrating synthesis on combinations that are simultaneously underrepresented and challenging. To alleviate data homogenization, VISA sepa-rates instruction planning from response generation. For each image, the planner first generates k can-didate instructions with sampled constraint sets, without immediately producing the corresponding responses. Each candidate instruction is then em-bedded and compared with the global embedding pool P of previously accepted instructions stored in memory. Following a greedy diversity selection strategy, VISA selects the candidate whose nearest neighbor in P is farthest away: 

i∗ = arg max 

i∈[k] min 

p∈P dist( eQi , e p),

where eQi denotes the embedding of candidate in-struction Qi, ep denotes an instruction embedding in P, and dist( ·, ·) measures the distance between two embeddings. Only the selected instruction Qi∗

is passed to the response generator to produce Ri.

3.4 Reflection 

After planning and execution, the Reflection stage determines whether a generated sample should be accepted, repaired, or discarded. Given a sam-ple (I, Q, R, C ), VISA evaluates each constraint 

c ∈ C through its bound verifier: deterministic constraints—word count, keyword inclusion, out-put format—are checked by executable code tools, while semantic and visually grounded constraints are assessed by structured LLM judges, both shar-ing a unified output interface that reports a binary pass/fail verdict alongside diagnostic information localizing each failure. When a sample fails, VISA uses these per-constraint diagnostics as structured feedback to select the most appropriate recovery strategy—applying local response edits for surface-level violations, or escalating to instruction rewrites and constraint simplification when the failure re-flects a deeper incompatibility between the instruc-tion and the image—rather than discarding the sam-ple outright. If the verification score stops improv-ing across consecutive attempts, VISA discards the sample once the budget is exhausted, prevent-ing the degenerate behavior in which repeated self-correction converges to an incorrect solution. For samples that pass verification, VISA esti-mates their informativeness by probing the target model M : given the accepted instruction Q and image I, M generates a response that is then eval-uated against the same constraint set used during synthesis. The per-constraint outcomes are aggre-gated into a difficulty score d ∈ [0 , 1] , where a lower score indicates that M already satisfies most constraints and thus gains little from the sample, while a higher score signals unresolved failures that provide more informative supervision. Both the ag-gregate score and the per-constraint failure pattern are written to memory, subsequently shifting the constraint sampling weights in the Planning stage toward types that remain challenging for M and directly linking each synthesis round to the current capability profile of the target model. 

3.5 Memory 

A defining characteristic of most data synthesis pipelines is that they are stateless: each sample is generated independently, and the synthesis pro-cess itself does not improve as more data is pro-duced. VISA breaks this assumption by maintain-ing a persistent memory M that accumulates the outcomes of every synthesis iteration and makes them available to all subsequent rounds. Specifi-cally, M stores the accepted samples together with their constraint sets and verifier handles, the in-struction embeddings that populate the diversity pool P, the per-constraint difficulty profiles de-rived from target-model probing, and the constraint types discovered during Perception along with their associated verification functions. This accumulated state feeds directly back into every stage of the next iteration, giving rise to VISA’s self-evolving behavior. The instruction embedding pool steers the diversity selector away from redundant instructions; the difficulty profiles shift constraint sampling weights toward types that remain unresolved for the target model; and newly discovered constraint types become immediately available for future synthesis. As a result, each iteration begins with strictly more information than the last—about what has already been generated, where the target model still struggles, and what constraints the system can express—so that subse-quent rounds can exploit increasingly informative synthesis state without external intervention. 

4 Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards 

Recent studies on reinforcement learning with veri-fiable rewards (RLVR) show that rule-based or pro-grammatically checkable signals can guide policy optimization without relying on separately trained reward models (Wen et al., 2025; Cai et al., 2025). This idea has also been adopted in recent reasoning models such as DeepSeek-R1 (Guo et al., 2025), where Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) optimizes model responses using verifiable reward signals for tasks with clearly defined correctness criteria (Shao et al., 2024). These methods suggest that verifier-derived rewards can provide a more transparent and task-aligned alternative to sepa-rately learned reward models when the desired be-havior can be checked by explicit rules or reliable evaluators. VISA naturally fits this paradigm because the agent binds each accepted instruction to explicit verifier contracts during execution. The same ver-ification logic used to accept and repair synthetic data can therefore be reused during RL. Given an image I, an instruction Q, a model response R, and the constraint set C = {c1, . . . , c m} embedded in the instruction, each constraint cj is evaluated by its bound verifier vj . We let vj (I, Q, R ) ∈ { 0, 1}

denote whether the response satisfies cj , and define the reward as the constraint pass rate: 

r(I, Q, R, C ) = 1

|C|

> |C|

X

> j=1

vj (I, Q, R ).

This reward directly measures the fraction of in-struction constraints followed by the model re-sponse, aligning RL optimization with multimodal instruction following. Since the reward is com-puted from verifier contracts already maintained by the synthesis agent, VISA does not require an addi-tional reward model, and failed constraints can be traced to specific sources such as formatting errors, missing keywords, or incorrect visually grounded descriptions. 

5 Experimental Setup 

5.1 Generated Training Data 

We synthesize a dataset of approximately 15k sam-ples using VISA, based on the image pool pro-vided by MM-IFInstruct 1. Each generated sample includes an image, a corresponding instruction, the model’s response, and the associated verification method. This dataset is used for fine-tuning of multimodal instruction-following models in our ex-periments. 

5.2 Models 

We use the Qwen3.5 2 series as the primary model family in our experiments. Specifically, Qwen3.5-27B serves as the synthesis agent in VISA, while Qwen3.5-4B is used as the target model for super-vised fine-tuning (SFT) and RL. We also include Qwen3.5-9B as a stronger same-family reference model. For comparison with contemporary open-source MLLMs, we report results of MiniCPM-V-4.5 (Yu et al., 2025) and InternVL3.5 (Wang et al., 2025) at comparable model scales. 

5.3 Training Details 

All experiments are conducted on a cluster of 128 L40s GPUs. The visual encoder layers are frozen, and only the LLM backbone and the alignment module are fine-tuned. We adopt a learning rate of 

1 × 10 −5 and perform training in bfloat16 precision to balance memory efficiency and numerical stabil-ity. To efficiently scale across multiple GPUs, we utilize DeepSpeed (Rajbhandari et al., 2020) ZeRO-3 for parallelized training, enabling effective model updates across the large distributed setup. SFT is implemented using swift (Zhao et al., 2025), while RL stages leverage verl (Sheng et al., 2024), with rollout size set to 8 and GPU memory utilization at 0.8. 

5.4 Evaluation Benchmarks 

We evaluate VISA from two perspectives: mul-timodal instruction following and general multi-modal capability. For instruction following, we use MM-IFEval (Ding et al., 2025), which evaluates                                             

> 1https://huggingface.co/datasets/ ChrisDing1105/MMIF-23k
> 2https://huggingface.co/collections/Qwen/ qwen35
> Model / Training Params MM-IFEval
> C-Level P-Level Avg. Qwen3.5-9B 9B 63.9 60.0 63.0 MiniCPM-V-4.5 8B 68.8 44.0 62.6 InternVL3.5-8B 8B 61.8 39.0 56.1 InternVL3.5-4B 4B 57.0 33.0 51.0 Qwen3.5-4B 4B 62.7 55.0 60.8 Qwen3.5-4B + MM-IFInstruct-23k 4B 65.7 46.0 60.8 + MM-IFDPO-23k 4B 65.0 52.0 61.7 +VISA-SFT-15k 4B 67.2 54.0 63.9 +VISA-RL-15k 4B 66.9 59.0 64.9
> Table 1: Main results on MM-IFEval. We report C-Level accuracy, P-Level accuracy, and their aver-age score; higher values indicate better instruction-following performance.

both compose-level (C-Level) constraints on out-put responses and perception-level (P-Level) cases grounded in input images. We report C-Level, P-Level, and average accuracy following the original protocol. For general capability evaluation, we re-port results on MMBench (Liu et al., 2024a), MM-Star (Chen et al., 2024), MM-Vet (Yu et al., 2023), HallusionBench (Guan et al., 2024), MathVista (Lu et al., 2024), OCRBench (Liu et al., 2024b), and AI2D (Kembhavi et al., 2016). These benchmarks cover broad multimodal perception and reasoning, integrated vision-language abilities, hallucination robustness, visual mathematical reasoning, optical character recognition (OCR)-centric understanding and scientific diagram understanding. To ensure a fair comparison with the base model and avoid confounding improvements from explicit reasoning traces, all benchmark evaluations are conducted in the non-thinking mode. 

6 Results 

6.1 Main Results 

Table 1 presents the main results on MM-IFEval. Among the baselines, Qwen3.5-9B achieves an av-erage score of 63.0, while the 4B-scale models (MiniCPM-V-4.5, InternVL3.5-4B, and Qwen3.5-4B) score 62.6, 51.0, and 60.8, respectively. Train-ing Qwen3.5-4B on MM-IFInstruct-23k brings only limited improvement, suggesting that simply increasing data volume without targeted synthesis is insufficient. In contrast, VISA-SFT-15k achieves an average score of 63.9, surpassing the 9B refer-ence model on the average score with less than half the parameters and using only 15k training sam-Method (Qwen3.5-4B) C-Level P-Level Avg. Base 62.7 55.0 60.8 Static Pipeline 64.9 46.0 60.2 + Reflection 65.6 48.0 61.2 + Reflection + Memory 67.1 51.0 63.1 Full VISA 67.2 54.0 63.9 

> Table 2: Ablation results on MM-IFEval with Qwen3.5-4B under SFT, showing the incremental contribution of reflection, memory, and the full VISA pipeline.

ples. VISA-RL-15k further improves the average score to 64.9, with a notable gain on P-Level (59.0), reducing the performance gap between constraint-oriented and perception-oriented cases. MM-IFEval contains 300 C-Level samples that assess multi-constraint satisfaction in model out-puts, and 100 P-Level samples that require visually grounded understanding akin to visual question an-swering (VQA), where instruction-following abil-ity is less likely to be the only bottleneck. As a result, P-Level gains are less directly attributable to instruction-following supervision alone, since they also depend on the model’s underlying visual perception and grounding ability. Nevertheless, VISA-RL-15k attains a P-Level score of 59.0, out-performing all 4B-scale baselines and approach-ing Qwen3.5-9B (60.0), suggesting that difficulty-aware constraint sampling and verifier-based RL provide useful supervision even for perception-heavy instructions. 

6.2 Ablation Study 

To understand the contribution of each component in VISA, we conduct an ablation study on MM-IFEval using Qwen3.5-4B as the target backbone under the SFT setting. As shown in Table 2, the static pipeline improves C-Level but noticeably de-grades P-Level, leading to a lower average score than the base model. This suggests that naively generating constraint-rich data can improve output-constraint adherence while harming perception-oriented behavior. Adding the Reflection mod-ule, which performs diagnostic-guided repair of failed samples, improves the average score from 60.2 to 61.2, indicating that bounded recovery en-hances per-sample reliability. Incorporating per-sistent memory further raises the average score to 63.1, with consistent gains on both C-Level and P-Level, confirming that coverage and difficulty signals accumulated across rounds help steer syn-thesis toward underrepresented and challenging constraints. The full VISA system achieves the best performance, reaching 67.2 on C-Level, 54.0 on P-Level, and 63.9 on average. Compared with the static pipeline, the largest numerical recovery appears on P-Level, suggesting that reflection and memory help reduce the perception-side degrada-tion introduced by naive synthesis. However, since P-Level cases are more perception-oriented and closer to VQA-style evaluation, the C-Level gains provide more direct evidence that VISA improves compositional instruction following. These results show that the components contribute complemen-tarily: Reflection improves local sample quality, Memory guides global constraint selection, and the remaining modules further enhance instruction diversity and difficulty targeting. 

6.3 General Capability Evaluation 

Table 3 reports results across seven general multi-modal benchmarks. VISA-SFT-15k improves the average score from 70.5 to 71.0, with gains on MMBench ( +2.8) and MMStar ( +1.5), and only a minor drop on HallusionBench ( −1.9). These re-sults suggest that instruction tuning on VISA data broadly preserves, and in some cases slightly en-hances, general multimodal perception and reason-ing. VISA-RL-15k achieves the strongest overall performance with an average score of 72.9, improv-ing over the base model on five out of seven bench-marks. The largest gain appears on MathVista (+9.1), which may partly reflect the alignment be-tween verifier-derived optimization and structured visual reasoning tasks, as MathVista emphasizes mathematical reasoning in visual contexts. OCR-Bench and AI2D also improve under RL, while HallusionBench also recovers to 57.5 compared with the SFT variant, suggesting that RL does not exacerbate the mild hallucination-related drop ob-served after SFT. Together, these results show that VISA improves instruction adherence without sac-rificing general multimodal capability, and that the verifier-derived reward signal supports transferable improvements across diverse evaluation settings. 

7 Analysis 

7.1 Dynamic Constraint Expansion 

Figure 2 analyzes how the agent’s constraint-verifier registry grows during data synthesis. We use constraint category to denote a high-level group such as attribute , spatial , or format ,and constraint type to denote a fine-grained re-Model / Training MMBench MMStar MM-Vet HallusionBench MathVista OCRBench AI2D Avg. Qwen3.5-4B 78.4 61.7 47.6 56.0 78.8 84.9 86.2 70.5 + VISA-SFT-15k 81.2 63.2 49.1 54.1 77.8 85.2 86.4 71.0 + VISA-RL-15k 78.8 62.5 50.5 57.5 87.9 85.6 87.6 72.9 

Table 3: General multimodal capability results on Qwen3.5-4B. VISA preserves or improves broad multimodal performance across seven public benchmarks, with all evaluations conducted in non-thinking mode. 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 Self-evolution round 010 20 30 40 50 New types per round        

> New discoveries / round Cumulative types (static + discovered)
> 100 150 200 250 300 Cumulative types
> start = 76
> final = 310 020 40 60 80 100 120 140
> Number of constraint types
> Other Style Lexical Format Structural Spatial Attribute 10 (3.2%) 13 (4.2%) 16 (5.2%) 24 (7.7%) 66 (21.3%) 71 (22.9%) 110 (35.5%)

Figure 2: Evolution of the constraint-verifier registry in VISA. Left: cumulative growth of constraint types across self-evolution rounds, showing that most discoveries occur early and gradually saturate. Right: category distribution of the final 310 constraint types. 

quirement within a category, such as word_count ,

json_format , or spatial_relation . Starting from 76 hand-crafted constraint types, VISA ex-pands the registry during perception. For each im-age, the system analyzes what kinds of require-ments the image can support and may propose new constraint types when the current state does not cover a useful image-grounded requirement. Each new type is linked to either a deterministic code ver-ifier or a structured LLM judge before it is added to the registry. Across 126 self-evolution rounds, this process adds 234 new constraint types, produc-ing a final library of 310 types, a 4.1× increase without additional human annotation. Appendix B lists the corresponding constraint categories and representative types. The left panel of Figure 2 shows that most new constraint types are found in the early rounds. After this initial stage, the number of newly added types drops quickly, and the cumulative curve becomes almost flat. This pattern suggests that the agent first discovers common visual requirements, such as ob-ject attributes, spatial relations, and response struc-ture, and then only occasionally adds rare cases in later rounds. In other words, the registry grows quickly at the beginning but does not keep expand-ing without limit. The right panel shows that the final registry is mainly composed of attribute , spa-tial , and structural categories. This means that the newly added types are mostly related to visual con-tent and response organization, rather than simple text-only rules such as keyword matching or output format. 

7.2 Diversity and Difficulty 

We analyze the 15 ,668 samples produced by VISA from the perspectives of diversity and difficulty. Figure 3 shows that the data covers a broad joint constraint space. All 90 off-diagonal category pairs appear at least once, and the strongest co-occurrences follow intuitive visual dependencies: 

object_grounded , counting , and spatial co-occur with attribute in 85 –92% of samples, while causal pairs more often with format (87% )and structural (61% ) than with spatial (49% ). The instruction embedding view further shows a continuous cloud rather than a few isolated tem-plate clusters, with a mean pairwise cosine distance of 0.977 . This supports the role of the embedding pool in planning: new instructions are selected against previous accepted instructions, reducing repeated surface forms. The full constraint-count distribution is provided in Figure 4 in Appendix A; it is centered around four to six constraints per sam-ple (mean 4.87 , median 5, standard deviation 2.12 ), confirming that most examples combine several attribute format spatial lexical style structural ocr_grounded object_grounded counting causal                                                                                 

> Co-occurring constraint category j
> attribute format spatial lexical style structural ocr_grounded object_grounded counting causal
> Anchor constraint category  i
> 100 82 78 68 59 38 11 11 682 100 71 69 58 37 12 10 690 82 100 66 58 35 10 11 785 86 72 100 63 46 11 11 587 86 73 74 100 43 11 12 670 68 54 66 53 100 10 778 80 59 58 49 38 100 6592 87 85 75 71 33 7100 591 84 90 62 56 27 12 9100 64 87 49 69 58 61 12 7100
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Conditional probability t-SNE 1 t-SNE 2
> attribute format spatial structural lexical ocr_grounded style object_grounded other

Figure 3: Diversity analysis of VISA-synthesized instructions. Left: conditional co-occurrence among the ten most frequent constraint categories, where each cell reports P (j | i) as a percentage. Right: t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) projection of high-dimensional instruction embeddings, colored by dominant constraint category. 

jointly satisfiable requirements instead of testing a single rule. We also use the target-model probe to estimate how much training signal these samples contain. Across all samples, 82 .6% are labeled easy , 15 .9% 

medium , and 1.5% hard , with 5.6% of constraint instances flagged as failures by the verifier track. This skewed distribution is expected, since the tar-get model already possesses strong basic multi-modal instruction-following ability, making many verified samples easy under the probing protocol. Rather than enforcing a balanced sample-level dif-ficulty distribution, VISA uses difficulty signals to identify the remaining failure modes on top of this strong base capability. As a result, easy cases preserve broad coverage and stabilize com-mon behaviors, while medium and hard cases con-tribute roughly 2,730 examples with at least one verifier-detected failure that can further improve the model’s upper-bound performance through SFT and verifier-derived RL. These failures are concen-trated in counting (11 .6% ), lexical (10 .2% ), and format (8.1% ), whereas style (0.16% ) and 

conditional (0% ) are almost always satisfied. This gives later synthesis rounds a clear signal about which constraint types remain difficult, with-out sacrificing broad coverage or verifier reliability. While VISA introduces additional synthesis-time computation compared with static pipelines, this cost is incurred offline during data construction and is partly amortized by parallel candidate generation and batched verification; we discuss this trade-off in Appendix C. 

8 Conclusion 

We presented VISA, an agentic framework for self-evolving multimodal instruction data synthe-sis. By coupling perception, planning and execu-tion, reflection, and memory update, VISA turns static generate-and-filter pipelines into adaptive feedback-driven synthesis. Its persistent memory accumulates verifier outcomes, accepted samples, diversity signals, and target-model difficulty pro-files, allowing later rounds to expand the constraint space and focus on unresolved weaknesses. Experiments with Qwen3.5 target models demonstrate that VISA improves multimodal in-struction following while preserving broad multi-modal capabilities. VISA-SFT-15k surpasses both the base model and data-synthesis baselines on the average MM-IFEval score, while VISA-RL-15k further improves the average MM-IFEval score to 64.9. Across seven general multimodal bench-marks, VISA-RL-15k improves the average score from 70.5 to 72.9, showing that stronger instruc-tion adherence does not come at the cost of general perception and reasoning ability. The same verifier contracts also serve directly as RL reward signals, requiring no separately trained reward model. We hope VISA provides a useful step toward adap-tive, feedback-driven data synthesis for multimodal instruction-following models. Limitations 

VISA primarily focuses on improving multimodal instruction synthesis through agentic iteration. As a result, the current framework prioritizes synthesis quality and difficulty adaptation over aggressive efficiency optimization. Although most synthe-sis stages can be parallelized across samples and constraints, state updates, iterative recovery, and target-aware probing still introduce additional over-head compared with static one-shot pipelines. We view this trade-off as acceptable in offline data con-struction, where synthesis quality is the primary objective. 

Ethics Statement 

This work studies synthetic data generation for mul-timodal instruction following. The generated data may inherit biases, unsafe associations, or privacy-sensitive content from the source images and the MLLM used for synthesis. Although VISA uses image-aware constraint selection, verification, and reflection feedback to improve constraint satisfac-tion, these mechanisms are not complete safety or fairness filters. VISA is designed for research on multimodal instruction tuning and agentic data synthesis; models trained with its data should be au-dited before deployment, especially in high-stakes settings, and all source images and generated arti-facts should be used in accordance with the licenses of the underlying datasets. 

References 

Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, and 1 others. 2025. Qwen3-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631 .Xin-Qiang Cai, Wei Wang, Feng Liu, Tongliang Liu, Gang Niu, and Masashi Sugiyama. 2025. Re-inforcement learning with verifiable yet noisy re-wards under imperfect verifiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.00915 .Lin Chen, Jinsong Li, Xiaoyi Dong, Pan Zhang, Yuhang Zang, Zehui Chen, Haodong Duan, Jiaqi Wang, Yu Qiao, Dahua Lin, and 1 others. 2024. Are we on the right way for evaluating large vision-language models? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:27056–27087. Shengyuan Ding, Shenxi Wu, Xiangyu Zhao, Yuhang Zang, Haodong Duan, Xiaoyi Dong, Pan Zhang, Yuhang Cao, Dahua Lin, and Jiaqi Wang. 2025. Mm-ifengine: Towards multimodal instruction following. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Con-ference on Computer Vision , pages 1099–1109. Tianrui Guan, Fuxiao Liu, Xiyang Wu, Ruiqi Xian, Zongxia Li, Xiaoyu Liu, Xijun Wang, Lichang Chen, Furong Huang, Yaser Yacoob, and 1 others. 2024. Hallusionbench: an advanced diagnostic suite for entangled language hallucination and visual illusion in large vision-language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 14375–14385. Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, and 1 others. 2025. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 .Weilei He, Feng Ju, Zhiyuan Fan, Rui Min, Minhao Cheng, and Yi R Fung. 2026. Empowering reliable visual-centric instruction following in mllms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03198 .Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang, Steven Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, and 1 oth-ers. 2024. Metagpt: Meta programming for a multi-agent collaborative framework. In International Con-ference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pages 23247–23275. Xin Huang, Jihao Liu, Jinliang Zheng, Boxiao Liu, Jia Wang, Yu Liu, Hongsheng Li, and Osamu Yoshie. 2025. Mm-instruct: Generated visual instructions for large multimodal model alignment. Neurocomputing ,page 131164. Aniruddha Kembhavi, Mike Salvato, Eric Kolve, Min-joon Seo, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Ali Farhadi. 2016. A diagram is worth a dozen images. In Euro-pean conference on computer vision , pages 235–251. Springer. Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Dong Guo, Renrui Zhang, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Kaichen Zhang, Peiyuan Zhang, Yanwei Li, Ziwei Liu, and 1 others. 2024. Llava-onevision: Easy visual task transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03326 .Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. 2023. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:34892– 34916. Yuan Liu, Haodong Duan, Yuanhan Zhang, Bo Li, Songyang Zhang, Wangbo Zhao, Yike Yuan, Jiaqi Wang, Conghui He, Ziwei Liu, and 1 others. 2024a. Mmbench: Is your multi-modal model an all-around player? In European conference on computer vision ,pages 216–233. Springer. Yuliang Liu, Zhang Li, Mingxin Huang, Biao Yang, Wenwen Yu, Chunyuan Li, Xu-Cheng Yin, Cheng-Lin Liu, Lianwen Jin, and Xiang Bai. 2024b. Ocr-bench: on the hidden mystery of ocr in large multi-modal models. Science China Information Sciences ,67(12):220102. Pan Lu, Hritik Bansal, Tony Xia, Jiacheng Liu, Chun-yuan Li, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Hao Cheng, Kai-Wei Chang, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. 2024. Mathvista: Evaluating mathematical reasoning of foundation models in visual contexts. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , vol-ume 2024, pages 23439–23554. Run Luo, Haonan Zhang, Longze Chen, Ting-En Lin, Xiong Liu, Yuchuan Wu, Min Yang, Yongbin Li, Minzheng Wang, Pengpeng Zeng, and 1 others. 2025. Mmevol: Empowering multimodal large language models with evol-instruct. In Findings of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 ,pages 19655–19682. Yusu Qian, Hanrong Ye, Jean-Philippe Fauconnier, Pe-ter Grasch, Yinfei Yang, and Zhe Gan. 2025. Mia-bench: Towards better instruction following evalua-tion of multimodal llms. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pages 35145–35165. Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian, and 1 others. 2024. Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world apis. In International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations , volume 2024, pages 9695–9717. Samyam Rajbhandari, Jeff Rasley, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. 2020. Zero: Memory optimizations toward training trillion parameter models. In SC20: international conference for high performance com-puting, networking, storage and analysis , pages 1–16. IEEE. Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, and 1 others. 2024. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 .Guangming Sheng, Chi Zhang, Zilingfeng Ye, Xibin Wu, Wang Zhang, Ru Zhang, Yanghua Peng, Haibin Lin, and Chuan Wu. 2024. Hybridflow: A flexible and efficient rlhf framework. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2409.19256 .Qwen Team. 2026. Qwen3. 5-omni technical report. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.15804 .Weiyun Wang, Zhangwei Gao, Lixin Gu, Hengjun Pu, Long Cui, Xingguang Wei, Zhaoyang Liu, Linglin Jing, Shenglong Ye, Jie Shao, and 1 others. 2025. In-ternvl3. 5: Advancing open-source multimodal mod-els in versatility, reasoning, and efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.18265 .Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions. In Proceed-ings of the 61st annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume 1: long papers) ,pages 13484–13508. Xumeng Wen, Zihan Liu, Shun Zheng, Shengyu Ye, Zhirong Wu, Yang Wang, Zhijian Xu, Xiao Liang, Junjie Li, Ziming Miao, and 1 others. 2025. Rein-forcement learning with verifiable rewards implicitly incentivizes correct reasoning in base llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.14245 .Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng, Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng, Chongyang Tao, and Daxin Jiang. 2023. Wizardlm: Empowering large lan-guage models to follow complex instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12244 .Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2022. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 .Tianyu Yu, Zefan Wang, Chongyi Wang, Fuwei Huang, Wenshuo Ma, Zhihui He, Tianchi Cai, Weize Chen, Yuxiang Huang, Yuanqian Zhao, and 1 others. 2025. Minicpm-v 4.5: Cooking efficient mllms via archi-tecture, data, and training recipe. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.18154 .Weihao Yu, Zhengyuan Yang, Linjie Li, Jianfeng Wang, Kevin Lin, Zicheng Liu, Xinchao Wang, and Lijuan Wang. 2023. Mm-vet: Evaluating large multimodal models for integrated capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.02490 .Wenqi Zhang, Zhenglin Cheng, Yuanyu He, Mengna Wang, Yongliang Shen, Zeqi Tan, Guiyang Hou, Mingqian He, Yanna Ma, Weiming Lu, and 1 oth-ers. 2024. Multimodal self-instruct: Synthetic ab-stract image and visual reasoning instruction using language model. In Proceedings of the 2024 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 19228–19252. Yuze Zhao, Jintao Huang, Jinghan Hu, Xingjun Wang, Yunlin Mao, Daoze Zhang, Zeyinzi Jiang, Zhikai Wu, Baole Ai, Ang Wang, and 1 others. 2025. Swift: a scalable lightweight infrastructure for fine-tuning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 29733–29735. Jeffrey Zhou, Tianjian Lu, Swaroop Mishra, Sid-dhartha Brahma, Sujoy Basu, Yi Luan, Denny Zhou, and Le Hou. 2023. Instruction-following evalu-ation for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07911 .

A Additional Analysis 

Figure 4 shows the full distribution of the number of constraints attached to each synthesized sample. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10       

> Number of constraints per sample
> 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
> Number of samples
> n= 15,668 median = 5, std = 2.12 range = [1, 10]
> 1,230 1,238 1,333 2,864 2,823 2,733 2,042 603 502 300
> mean = 4.87

Figure 4: Distribution of the number of constraints per synthesized sample, showing that most accepted samples combine multiple jointly satisfiable requirements rather than a single constraint. 

B Constraint Details 

The constraint registry is organized at two granular-ities. Constraint categories provide coarse groups for analysis and diversity control, while constraint types are the atomic units sampled by the planner and bound to verifiers. Table 4 summarizes the final registry after self-evolution. “Seed” counts the hand-crafted types available at initialization, and “+Disc.” counts types added through dynamic discovery after verifier binding. The largest expan-sions appear in visually grounded and structural categories, reflecting VISA’s emphasis on image-compatible requirements and response organiza-tion. The seed constraint registry is initialized with common instruction-following constraint families studied in prior IF benchmarks, including IFEval and MM-IFEngine/MM-IFEval. VISA extends this initial registry through image-conditioned discov-ery and verifier binding. Unlike a fixed bench-mark taxonomy, VISA maintains the registry as an evolving synthesis-time object whose entries can be filtered, discovered, validated, and reused across self-evolution rounds. 

C Discussion on Synthesis Efficiency 

The main cost of VISA comes from replacing single-pass generation with an agentic loop. In our implementation, the planner generates four candi-date instructions for each image during the greedy selection stage, and we set the multi-threaded con-currency to 16. With a single synthesis model deployed on L40s GPUs, the end-to-end synthe-sis time is approximately 20 seconds per accepted sample on average. Several design choices help amortize this cost. Perception is performed once per image; the four candidate instructions are generated in parallel before the more expensive response-generation stage; code-based verifiers are lightweight and parallelizable; and LLM-track constraints are packed into batched judge calls whenever pos-sible. The bounded recovery mechanism also avoids unbounded self-correction. Among the 15,668 accepted samples, 10,230 samples (65.3%) pass verification without recovery, 2,241 samples (14.3%) require one recovery attempt, 2,174 sam-ples (13.9%) require two attempts, and 1,023 sam-ples (6.5%) reach three attempts. This shows that most accepted samples incur no recovery overhead, while only a small fraction requires the maximum repair budget. The efficiency trade-off is therefore best under-stood per accepted and target-informative sample rather than per raw generated sample. A static pipeline may generate more candidates per unit time, but many candidates can be redundant, in-compatible with the image, unverifiable, or already easy for the target model. In contrast, VISA spends more computation before admission, but each ac-cepted sample is associated with explicit constraint sets, verifier handles, difficulty scores, and recovery diagnostics. These metadata are not discarded: they update the agent state and guide subsequent syn-thesis rounds. To assess the reliability of the LLM-based judge track, we further conduct a manual audit on a sampled subset of judge decisions and observe approximately 95% agreement with human annotations, suggesting that the verifier feedback used by the agent is largely consistent with human Category Representative constraint types Seed +Disc. Total 

format word_count , sentence_count , paragraph_count , json_format ,

xml_format , yaml_format , markdown_format , list_format ,

punctuation_control , number_precision , quotation ,

placeholder_count , flexible_layout 

23 +1 24 lexical must_include_keyword , must_exclude_keyword , keyword_frequency ,

keyword_in_first_sentence , alliteration , acronym_constraint ,

word_diversity , synonym_substitution 

16 +0 16 structural section_headers , prefix_suffix , paragraph_start ,

paragraph_end , sentence_pattern , logical_connector , summary ,

argument_structure , postscript 

13 +53 66 style tone , perspective , language , tense , rhetorical_device ,

audience_adaptation , role , scenario_framing 

11 +2 13 attribute attribute_describe , scene_mood , size_compare , visual_include ,

visual_exclude 

5 +105 110 spatial spatial_relation 1 +70 71 counting object_count 1 +1 2object_grounded object_describe 1 +0 1ocr_grounded ocr_content 1 +1 2causal causal_explain , temporal_sequence 2 +1 3conditional conditional_if , hypothetical 2 +0 2

Total constraint types 76 +234 310 

Table 4: Constraint categories in the final VISA registry. Representative types are illustrative examples; “Seed” and “+Disc.” denote initially defined and dynamically discovered constraint types, respectively. 

judgment. 

D Tool Registry Interface 

Each verification tool in VISA’s code-verifier track follows a compact interface contract: a metadata block links the tool to a constraint category and type, a verify function maps a response and typed parameters to a standardized pass/fail record, and a small set of test cases is executed before the tool en-ters the registry. The same contract is used for both seed verifiers and code verifiers attached to dynam-ically discovered constraint types. The schematic below illustrates the interface with a shortened JSON-format verifier; implementation details are omitted because they are tool-specific and not cen-tral to the framework.  

> TOOL_META = { "tool_id": "verify_json_format", "description": "Check JSON format", "constraint_categories": ["format"], "constraint_types": ["json_format"], "input_schema": { "response": { "type": "str", "required": True, "desc": "Response text" }, "required_keys": { "type": "list", "required": False, "desc": "Required JSON keys" }}, "output_schema": { "pass": {"type": "bool"}, "expected": {"type": "str"}, "actual": {"type": "str"}, "detail": {"type": "str"} }}def verify(response: str, **params) -> dict: ... return { "pass": <bool>, "expected": <str>, "actual": <str>, "detail": <str> }TEST_CASES = [ {"input": {"response": '{"a": 1} '}, "expected_pass": True}, {"input": {"response": "not json"}, "expected_pass": False}, ... ]

E Prompt Examples 

This appendix provides abbreviated prompt tem-plates for the main agent calls in VISA. We omit implementation-specific formatting instruc-tions and long field lists; placeholders such as 

{...} are filled by the controller at runtime. 

Perception and constraint-type discovery. Is-sued at the beginning of every iteration to the mul-timodal teacher together with the input image. It returns both the perception profile of the image and, when warranted, proposals for new constraint types. 

Analyze the image and return a compact struc-tured profile. Summarize the visible scene, es-timate its complexity, and mark any vision-grounded constraint types from {registered types} that the image cannot support. If the registered library misses a useful require-ment for this image-conditioned instruction, pro-pose up to {max_discover} new constraint types with their category, verifier track, and short de-scription. Do not propose a new type when an existing parameterized type already covers the requirement. 

Constraint selection. Given the perception pro-file and the candidate constraint types compatible with the image, the planner selects a budgeted, mu-tually consistent constraint set. 

Select {constraint_budget} compatible constraint types from {candidate types}. Use the priority weights from the agent state as a soft guide, while avoiding redundant choices from a single cate-gory. The selected constraints must be jointly satisfi-able and verifiable. For each selected type, write a short description: vision-grounded constraints should refer to objects by role or category without revealing the answer, and text-only constraints should state the required response property di-rectly. 

Instruction composition. Once a constraint set is fixed, the agent rewrites it as a single natural-language user instruction. 

Write a single natural user request for the image. The request should be fluent and self-contained, and it should integrate all selected constraints without listing them mechanically. Do not reveal visual evidence that the model should infer from the image. If a constraint spec-ifies the response format, ask for that format in natural language rather than providing an answer skeleton. 

Verifier parameter extraction. For constraints bound to a code verifier, a lightweight extraction prompt fills the verifier’s typed parameters from the natural-language description. 

For each code-verifiable constraint, extract only the parameters explicitly supported by its verifier schema. Preserve the required data types and return one parameter object per constraint. If a value is not specified or not relevant, set it to 

null ; do not infer missing values from common sense or from the image. 

Coverage self-check. Before full verification, a judge LLM checks whether the composed instruc-tion explicitly references every selected constraint, and feeds any missing items back to the recovery loop. 

Check whether the composed instruction explic-itly covers every selected constraint. For each missing constraint, return its identifier and a brief repair suggestion. Do not count a constraint as covered merely be-cause it is implicit, conventional, or likely to be satisfied by default.