Title: 2610.11662v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.11662v1

Published Time: Fri, 09 Oct 2026 01:14:20 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
Lamarck’s Driving School: Discovering Autonomous 

# Driving Training Strategies through Evolutionary 

# Competition 

Yichun Ye , He Zhang , Ye Tian *, Senior Member, IEEE , and  Jian Sun , Senior Member, IEEE 

Abstract —Autonomous driving capabilities depend strongly on the 

distribution of scenarios encountered during training. Existing 

methods commonly construct or dynamically adapt training 

scenario distributions using surrogate criteria such as realism, 

difficulty, or  risk.  However, these predefined surrogates may 

misrepresent training value, leading to inefficient use of training 

resources.  To address this limitation, we propose a Lamarckian 

evolutionary framework that replaces surrogate -based guidance 

with competition  among candidate distributions. We formulate 

training strategy discovery as a multi -stage bilevel optimization 

problem and use Lamarckian evolution  algorithm  to approximate 

its solution. At the outer level, Darwinian crossover, mutation, and 

selection explore the scenario distribution space; at the inner level, 

policy learning acquires new capabilities, and Lamarckian 

inheritance transfers them to subsequent s tages, allowing scenario 

distributions and policy capabilities to co -evolve. The resulting 

evolutio nary trajectories reveal recurring stage -wise regularities 

among high -value distributions, characterized by capability 

accumulation through stage -wise challenge rotation. We further 

distill these regularities into a lightweight, reusable Lamarckian 

Trainin g Strategy. Experiments show that, compared with the 

baseline, the complete framework reduces performance loss by up 

to 25.07%, while the lightweight strategy still achieves a 19.13% 

reduction. These results demonstrate that evolutionary 

competition can bo th discover effective training strategies and 

reveal reusable stage -wise patterns in how the value of training 

distributions changes with policy capability . Code is available  on 

GitHub .

Keywords —Autonomous driving,  Scenario distribution, Lamarckian 

evolution  algorithm , Data -based approaches .

I. INTRODUCTION 

earning -based autonomous driving has become a

prominent research direction. Recent advances in  end -

to -end models [1 -3],  vision -language models [4 -6], and 

world models [7 -9] have further expanded the perception, 

reasoning, planning, and imagination capabilities of 

autonomous driving systems. As these models become more 

capable, further progress depends not only on model design, but 

also on the training scenarios from which they learn. 

For learning -based autonomous driving, a driving scenario is 

a more natural unit of interaction than an isolated state -action 

pair [10]. A scenario specifies the road environment, traffic 

participants, interaction dynamics, environmental conditions, 

and ta sk objectives [11]. Yet training gains are accumulated 

over a training set rather than a single scenario. The scenario 

distribution of that set determines what situations the policy 

encounters and how often it encounters them, thereby shaping 

the capabilit ies learned.  Autonomous driving training therefore 

benefits not only from optimizing policy parameters under a 

given scenario distribution but also from optimizing the training 

scenario distribution itself. More broadly, research on 

embodied intelligence shows that env ironmental complexity 

can shape both acquired capabilities and learning efficiency 

[12]. This motivates us to study scenario distributions as the 

environmental structure of autonomous driving training. 

Existing studies design or dynamically adapt training 

scenario distributions according to surrogate criteria. 

Naturalistic scenario replay emphasizes realism by sampling 

from recorded traffic data  [13 -15] ; curriculum learning 

organizes or adapts scenarios according to difficulty, learning 

progress, or model weaknesses [16 -21]; and safety -critical 

scenario generation prioritizes risk, failure, or criticality [22 -24]. 

These strategies share an implicit assumption: the better a 

distribution scores under the ch osen surrogate criterion, the 

greater its training value. 

However, distributions favored by these criteria do not 

necessarily produce better post -training performance. The 

underlying problem is an objective mismatch: the signal used 

to design the training distribution differs from the outcome that 

training is int ended to improve [25 -27]. Consequently, 

surrogate -driven design can lead to inefficient use of training 

resources and obscure reusable patterns in which distributions 

are valuable at different stages of policy development. 

To align distribution design with post -training performance, 

we let candidate distributions compete according to the 

performance they produce after policy training rather than 

assigning value through prescribed surrogate rules. Repeated 

competition produce s high -value training paths and 

evolutionary records from which reusable training patterns can 

be discovered. 

# L

*Research supported by  the  National Outstanding Youth Science Fund 

Project of National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 

[52422215]  and  the National Engineering Research Center of Road Safety 

Control Technology under Grant number [2025GCZXKFKT19A] .

Yichun Ye , Ye Tian, and Jian Sun are with the Department of Traffic 

Engineering and the Key Laboratory of Road and Traffic Engineering, Ministry 

of Education, Tongji University, Shanghai, China  (e-mail: 

2610276 @tongji.edu.cn , tianye@tongji.edu.cn , sunjian@tongji.edu.cn ).  He 

Zhang is  with the School of Transportation and Logistics, Southwest  Jiaotong 

University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China  (e-mail:  zhanghe@swjtu.edu.cn ). 

Corresponding author:  Ye Tian ( tianye@tongji.edu.cn ).Fig.  1. Overview of the proposed framework, in which scenario 

distributions and driving policies evolve through competition 

based on post -training evaluation and capability inheritance 

Fig.  1 summarizes how scenario distributions and policy 

capabilities evolve through competition and inheritance.  The 

value of a candidate distribution becomes observable only after 

policy training and cannot be directly differentiated with 

respect to the distribution parameters, making strategy 

discovery a multi -stage black -box optimization problem. We 

formulate this  search as a multi -stage bilevel problem and 

approximate it through Lamarckian evolution. At each stage, 

Darwinian crossover, mutation, and selection [28] explore the 

scenario distribution space, while the policy is trained 

separately on each candidate di stribution. Post -training 

performance determines which individuals survive, and 

Lamarckian inheritance [29] passes the acquired policy 

capabilities to the next stage. The resulting evolutionary record 

reveals which distributions are valuable at successive  capability 

stages without prescribing in advance how the training 

distribution should change. 

We use complete Lamarckian evolution as a large -scale 

discovery experiment and analyze the high -value distributions 

retained across generations. The resulting trajectories reveal an 

empirical pattern of capability accumulation through stage -wise 

challenge  rotation. Because repeating complete evolution is 

computationally expensive, we distill these regularities into a 

reusable, lightweight Lamarckian Training Strategy  (LTS)  that 

preserves the discovered training logic without further 

evolutionary search. 

The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows. 

 The first formulation of training strategy discovery for 

autonomous driving as a multi -stage bilevel problem 

driven by post -training performance rather than surrogate 

criteria. 

 A Lamarckian evolutionary framework that enables 

training strategies to emerge through distribution 

competition and capability inheritance. 

 Evolutionary analysis reveals an interpretable pattern of 

capability accumulation through stage -wise challenge 

rotation, which is distilled into a lightweight and reusable 

Lamarckian Training Strategy .

 Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the 

Lamarckian Training Strategy, which outperforms the 

Replay baseline and all comparison methods in overall 

score .

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 

reviews related work. Section III formulates autonomous 

driving training as a bilevel optimization problem over multiple 

stages. Section IV presents the proposed Lamarckian 

evolutionary framework.  Section V reports the evolutionary 

search, strategy validation, and ablation studies. Section VI 

concludes the paper and discusses future directions. 

II. RELATED WORK 

Existing studies on training scenarios can be broadly grouped 

into three paradigms: naturalistic scenario replay, curriculum -

based scenario organization, and safety -critical scenario 

generation. These paradigms organize training scenarios around 

realism, d ifficulty, or risk, but generally select distributions 

using surrogate criteria rather than post -training performance. 

A. Naturalistic  Scenario  Replay 

Naturalistic scenario replay provides a foundational source 

of training scenarios for autonomous driving. Datasets such as 

Waymo Open Dataset [13], nuScenes [14], and ApolloScape 

[15] cover real road structures, traffic participant behaviors, and 

diverse driving tasks, supporting perception, prediction, 

planning, and end -to -end driving model training. Real -world 

replay preserves natural traffic distributions, but naturalistic 

data is dominated by common low  risk cases, providing 

insufficient exposure to lon g-tail interactions and safety -critical 

situations [30]. Although scenario augmentation, domain 

randomization, and benchmark design improve coverage, the 

training scenario distribution is still mostly treated as an 

externally given condition rather than an  optimizable strategy 

variable. 

B. Curriculum -Based Methods 

Curriculum -based methods treat training content selection as 

a higher -level decision. Existing approaches use manual 

curricula, fixed rules, automated sampling, policy -dependent 

environment generation, regret, or learning potential to design, 

prioritize, or adapt scenarios online [16], [18], [31 -37]. 

Population -based training also combines evolutionary 

competition with parameter inheritance, but optimizes learning 

hyperparameters rather than training data or environment 

distributions [38]. Inspired by evide nce that environmental 

complexity shapes agent capabilities and learnability [12], we 

use complete Lamarckian evolution to let scenario distributions er ormance:  

> er ormance: er ormance:
> lone
> rossover
> utation
> tinction

compete, identify recurring patterns among elite distributions, 

and distill them into a reusable training strategy rather than 

another online adaptation rule. 

C. Safety -Critical  Scenario  Generation 

Safety -critical scenario generation focuses on long -tail risks 

and system vulnerabilities. Related methods construct high  risk 

scenarios through optimization, reinforcement learning, 

generative models, or large models to expose failure modes 

under boundary conditions [24, 39]. For example, Closed -loop 

Adversarial Training (CAT) formulates closed -loop training as 

a joint proce ss of driving policy learning and adversarial 

environment generation, and continuously trains the policy in 

safety -critical scenarios  [23]. These methods increase exposure 

to challenging scenarios, but they usually optimize collision 

rate, failure rate, risk exposure, or criticality. Such objectives 

may bias training toward worst -case scenarios without 

revealing which distribution sequen ces produce reusable 

improvements in task -level performance. 

III. PROBLEM DEFINITION 

A.  Learning Formulation for Autonomous Driving 

In autonomous driving learning, the basic training unit is not 

an isolated state -action pair, but a complete closed -loop driving 

scenario. A scenario with horizon  𝑇  is denoted in (1). 

𝑋 𝑇  = (𝑠 0, 𝑎 0, 𝑠 1, 𝑎 1, … , 𝑠 𝑇 −1, 𝑎 𝑇 −1, 𝑠 𝑇 ) (1)

Here,  𝑠 𝑡  denotes the traffic state at time t, including road 

structure, weather, and the states of traffic participants.  𝑎 𝑡 

denotes the action taken by the ego vehicle under state  𝑠 𝑡 .

Let  𝑞  denote the training scenario distribution, which 

specifies the scenario factors sampled during training. Although 

closed -loop trajectories are jointly induced by  𝑞  and the ego 

policy  𝜃 , we write  𝑋 𝑇 ~𝑞  for simplicity. 

Under a given  𝑞 , autonomous driving learning optimizes the 

policy parameter  𝜃  with respect to a training objective  𝐽 . Here, 

𝐽  may represent the expected cumulative reward in 

reinforcement learning or the negative loss in imitation or 

supervised learning. (2) gives a typical form based on 

cumulative reward. 

𝐽 (𝜃 , 𝑞 ) = 𝔼 𝑋 𝑇 ∼𝑞  [∑ 𝛾 𝑡 

> 𝑇 −1
> 𝑡 =0

𝑟 (𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑎 𝑡 , 𝑠 𝑡 +1)] (2)

The standard learning problem is written in (3). 

𝜃 ∗(𝑞 ) = arg max  

> 𝜃

𝐽 (𝜃 , 𝑞 ) (3)

This formulation captures the conventional setting, in which 

policy parameters are optimized under a given training scenario 

distribution. Naturalistic scenario replay, curriculum -based 

training, and adversarial training mainly differ in how  𝑞  is 

constructed, rather than in the basic learning form itself. 

If different training scenario distributions lead to different 

learning outcomes,  𝑞  should be treated not merely as an 

externally specified condition but as an optimization variable in 

the training strategy. 

B.  Training Strategy Optimization Problem 

The training objective and the final evaluation objective are 

not fully aligned. The training stage directly optimizes  𝐽 (𝜃 , 𝑞 ),

such as cumulative reward or training loss, whereas final 

driving performance is measured by a comprehensive 

evaluation function  𝐹 . Since  𝐹  is usually an aggregated metric 

and cannot be simply decomposed into rewards at individual 

time steps, optimizing  𝐽  under a given  𝑞  does not necessarily 

optimize F, as shown in (4). 

arg max  

> 𝜃

𝐽 (𝜃 , 𝑞 ) ⇏ arg max  

> 𝜃

𝐹 (𝜃 ) (4)

This mismatch indicates that the training scenario 

distribution affects not only the training process but also the 

final evaluation performance. We therefore treat the sequence 

of training scenario distributions as an optimizable training 

strategy. Let q d enote the sequence of distributions used over 

finite -step stages  𝐾  . The resulting multi -stage bilevel 

optimization problem is written in (5). 

{

𝑞 ∗ = arg  max 

> 𝑞 ∈𝑄

𝐹 (𝜃 𝐾 )

𝜃 𝑘 +1 = 𝑈 (𝜃 𝑘 , 𝑞 𝑘 ),0 ≤ 𝑘  < 𝐾  (5)

Here,  𝑄  is the candidate space of training scenario 

distributions, and U denotes the finite -step policy update under 

a candidate distribution. Direct sequence -level optimization is 

intractable because evaluating a candidate requires policy 

training. We therefore  approximate it stage by stage and define 

the stage -k training value as the post -training evaluation 

performance in (6). This stage -wise formulation is a greedy 

approximation to (5), rather than an exact decomposition or a 

guarantee of global optimality. 

𝑉 𝑘 (𝑞 𝑘 ; 𝜃 𝑘 ) = 𝐹 (𝑈 (𝜃 𝑘 , 𝑞 𝑘 )) (6)

Here,  𝑉 𝑘 (𝑞 𝑘 ; 𝜃 𝑘 ) is the post -training value of  𝑞 𝑘  under the 

current policy capability  𝜃 𝑘  and the fixed stage -wise training 

budget. It is conditional on the inherited policy state and the 

evaluation protocol, rather than an intrinsic or policy -

independent property of  𝑞 𝑘 . The outer -level selection problem 

at stage k is therefore written as (7). 

𝑞 𝑘  

> ∗

= arg  max 

> 𝑞 𝑘 ∈𝑄

𝑉 𝑘 (𝑞 𝑘 ; 𝜃 𝑘 ) (7)

This formulation uses post -training evaluation performance 

to define stage -conditioned distribution value, which becomes 

the outer -level fitness signal in the Lamarckian evolution 

framework of Section IV. 

IV. METHODOLOGY 

Section III shows that the training scenario distribution 

should not be treated merely as an externally given condition, 

but as the core object of training strategy optimization. Based 

on this problem definition, this paper proposes a Lamarckian 

evolutiona ry framework for automatically discovering high -

value scenario distributions during training. The framework 

couples scenario search with policy learning: the outer level 

continuously generates and selects high -value training scenario 

distributions, while t he inner level updates policy capability 

under these distributions and transfers the learned policy state 

to the next stage.  Fig.  2 summarizes the problem formulation 

and the resulting framework. Fig.  2. Overview of the problem formulation and Lamarckian evolutionary framework. 

The method consists of scenario parameterization in Section 

IV -A, Lamarckian evolution in Section IV -B, scenario 

generation and sampling in Section IV -C, and distillation into a 

reusable Lamarckian Training Strategy in Section IV -D. 

A.  Scenario Parameterization 

To make the optimization operational, we decompose closed -

loop trajectory generation. The training scenario distribution q 

specifies the initial traffic states, environment dynamics, and 

background behavior. Together with the ego policy, it induces 

the clo sed -loop trajectory distribution. For a trajectory  𝑋 𝑇  with 

horizon  𝑇 :

𝑃 (𝑋 𝑇 ) = 𝑃 (𝑠 0, 𝑎 0, 𝑠 1, 𝑎 1, … , 𝑠 𝑇 −1, 𝑎 𝑇 −1, 𝑠 𝑇 )

= 𝑃 (𝑠 0) ∏ 𝑃 (𝑠 𝑡 +1|𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑎 𝑡 )

> 𝑇 −1
> 𝑡 =0

· 𝜋 𝜃  (𝑎 𝑡  |𝑠 𝑡 )

= 𝑃 𝜙 (𝑠 0) ∏ 𝑃 𝜙 (𝑠 𝑡 +1|𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑎 𝑡 , 𝑏 𝑡 )𝑃 𝜙 (𝑏 𝑡 |𝑠 𝑡 )𝜋 𝜃 (𝑎 𝑡 |𝑠 𝑡 )

> 𝑇 −1
> 𝑡 =0

.

(8)

Here,  𝑃 𝜙 (𝑠 0) is the initial scenario distribution, 

𝑃 𝜙 (𝑠 𝑡 +1|𝑠 𝑡  , 𝑎 𝑡  , 𝑏 𝑡 ) is  the environment dynamics,  𝑃 𝜙 (𝑏 𝑡 |𝑠 𝑡 ) is 

the background -vehicle policy, and  𝜋 𝜃  (𝑎 𝑡  |𝑠 𝑡 ) is the ego policy. 

Eq. (8) separates environment parameter  𝜙  , which 

characterizes initial states, background behavior, and dynamics, 

from policy parameter  𝜃 , which characterizes the ego policy's 

capability. Thus: 

𝑋 𝑇 ~𝑞 𝜃 ,𝜙 . (9)

At stage k, selecting a distribution reduces to searching over 

environment parameters. Let q(ϕₖ) denote the scenario 

distribution induced by ϕₖ. The stage -wise problem derived 

from (7) is: 

𝜙 𝑘  

> ∗

= arg  max 

> 𝜙 𝑘 ∈𝛷

𝑉 𝑘 (𝑞 𝜙 𝑘  ; 𝜃 𝑘 ) (10 )

Here,  𝑉 𝑘 (𝑞 𝜙 𝑘  ; 𝜃 𝑘 ) is the conditional post -training value 

produced by the distribution induced by  𝜙 𝑘  

> ∗

, and the selected 

distribution is  𝑞 𝑘  

> ∗

= 𝑞 (𝜙 𝑘  

> ∗

) . This value is defined under the 

current inherited policy state, fixed training budget, and 

evaluation protocol. 

Thus,  𝜃  is updated through learning at the inner level, 

whereas  𝜙  is updated through evolution at the outer level.  𝜙 

contains parameters governing initial states, environment 

dynamics, and background policies, turning abstract 

distribution optimization into tractable parameter search.  The 

environment parameters are listed in  Table A. 1.

B. Lamarckian Evolution Framework 

After parameterization, each stage becomes a finite -step 

bilevel process: the outer level searches over environment 

parameters, and the inner level updates the inherited policy 

under the induced distribution. 

Following standard fitness -based selection in evolutionary 

computation [40], we use evaluation performance after a fixed 

training budget as fitness. This directly matches the operational 

objective and avoids favoring a poorly performing inherited 

policy me rely because it admits a large numerical gain, as 

expressed in (11). 

𝑓 𝑘 ,𝑛  = 𝐹 (𝑈 (𝜃 𝑘 ,𝑛 , 𝑞 𝜙 𝑘 ,𝑛  )) (11 )

For candidate n at stage k, the distribution induced by ϕₖ,ₙ is 

used by U for the finite -step update from the inherited policy 

state. Candidate distributions compete through the post -training 

performance realized within their inherited policy lineages. 

The challenge is twofold: the environment -parameter space 

is high -dimensional and heterogeneous, and each candidate's 

fitness becomes observable only after policy training and 

evaluation. We approximate this black -box discovery process 

using Lamarckian evo lution across multiple environments. 

In Lamarckian evolution, individuals are evaluated after 

learning, and the acquired policy capability state is preserved. 

Here, environment parameters undergo evolutionary operations, 

while policy parameters are updated through finite -step training ( ) = ,               

> =
> (,
> ,
> 1, )
> ···
> ,=,
> (
> ,
> ),,,ra g,,,1,
> (,)
> ,

and capability inheritance. The framework consists of five steps; 

the  sampling procedure,  evaluation function, and algorithm 

parameters are detailed in  Algorithm 1 , Table A. 3, and  Table A. 4,

respectively. 

1)  Population 

A complete Lamarckian evolution run consists of multiple 

training stages, and each stage contains several candidate 

individuals. The n -th candidate individual at stage k is 

composed of an environment parameter and a policy 

parameter, as shown in (12) .

𝒫 𝑘  = {(𝜙 𝑘 ,𝑛 , 𝜃 𝑘 ,𝑛 )}𝑛 =1 

> 𝑁

(12 )

Here, the environment parameter determines the 

corresponding training scenario distribution, while the policy 

parameter represents the policy capability inherited by the 

individual at the current stage. In the initial stage, all 

candidate individuals start  from the same initial policy 

parameter and initialize their environment parameters based 

on scenario statistics from naturalistic driving data. In later 

stages, candidate individuals are generated jointly through 

parent inheritance, crossover, mutation, a nd injection of 

high -fitness environment parameters. 

2)  Crossover and Mutation 

Crossover combines existing high -fitness environment 

parameters so that different scenario attributes, such as road 

structure, traffic state, and behavioral statistics, can be 

recombined. Mutation perturbs local environment 

parameters to explore new traini ng scenario distributions. 

The generation of new candidate environment parameters is 

expressed in (13). 

𝜙 𝑘 ,𝑐  = Mu  (Cross (𝜙 𝑘 −1,𝑝 1, 𝜙 𝑘 −1,𝑝 2)) (13 )

Crossover and mutation operate only on environment 

parameters and do not directly modify policy parameters. 

This separation keeps the method logically consistent: 

training content is organized through evolution at the outer 

level, whereas policy capability  is acquired through policy 

training at the inner level. 

3)  Learning 

For each candidate environment parameter, the 

corresponding training scenario set is first sampled from the 

distribution it induces. The policy is then initialized with that 

individual's inherited policy parameter and undergoes finite -

step training, as sho wn in (14). 

𝜃 ̂𝑘 ,𝑛  = 𝑈 (𝜃 𝑘 ,𝑛 , 𝑞 𝜙 𝑘 ,𝑛  ) (14 )

The updated policy parameter  𝜃 ̂𝑘 ,𝑛  represents the updated 

capability state acquired under the candidate training 

scenario distribution. Candidate individuals must be 

evaluated and selected before they can enter the next stage. 

4)  Evaluation 

After finite -step policy training, the unified evaluation 

function  𝐹  scores the updated policy associated with each 

candidate individual, thereby measuring the training utility 

of the candidate environment parameter at the current 

capability stage, as shown in (15). 

𝐹 (𝜃 ̂𝑘 ,𝑛 ) = 𝛽 0 ∑ 𝛽 𝑖  · 𝑀 𝑖  (𝜃 ̂𝑘 ,𝑛 ) (15 )

The evaluation function F reflects overall performance 

under a unified protocol rather than training reward or loss. 

Selection therefore depends on evaluation performance after 

training, not surrogate criteria such as realism, difficulty, or 

risk. The metr ics and weights are provided in  Table A. 3.

During evolutionary search, F is computed on the fitness 

evaluation set, while the final test set is reserved for final 

performance reporting. 

5)  Selection 

High -fitness individuals are selected as parents. Let  ℐ𝑘  be 

their index set; individuals in the next stage inherit the 

capability states acquired through finite -step training from 

their selected parents, as in (16). Environment parameters 

enter the next stage through inheritance, crossover, mutation, 

or the inj ection of high -fitness environment parameters. 

{ℐ𝑘  = l c  ({𝐹 (𝜃 ̂𝑘 ,𝑛 )}𝑛 =1 

> 𝑁

)

𝜃 𝑘 +1,𝑖  = 𝜃 ̂𝑘 ,𝑝 𝑖  , 𝑝 𝑖  ∈ ℐ𝑘 

(16 )

What is preserved is not only the high -value training 

scenario distribution represented by the environment 

parameter, but also the policy capability state acquired 

through finite -step training under that distribution. Thus, 

policy capability can accumulate  continuously along the 

evolutionary path, reflecting the core Lamarckian feature of 

inheritance of acquired characteristics. 

C. Scenario Generation and Sampling 

The environment parameter provides a parameterized 

representation of the training scenario distribution, but actual 

training requires converting it into an executable training 

scenario set. To this end, we adopt a pipeline that constructs a 

scenario pool,  samples scenarios to match target distributions, 

and checks feasibility, thereby mapping abstract environment 

parameters to executable training data. 

We construct a unified scenario pool from a common set of 

400 Waymo source scenarios and two sets of variants derived 

from these same sources. 

1)  The naturalistic component consists of the 400 Waymo 

source scenarios and preserves their road structures, 

traffic -participant trajectories, and interaction patterns. 

2)  Generalized variants are generated by TrafficGen [41] 

exclusively from these 400 source scenarios to expand the 

coverage of vehicle layouts, initial states, and trajectory 

distributions. 

3)  Safety -critical variants are generated by CAT [23] 

exclusively from the same 400 source scenarios to 

supplement long -tail and safety -critical training cases. 

Given a target environment parameter, the sampler 

constructs a training scenario set from the unified pool such that 

its empirical statistics match the target distribution as closely as 

possible. The sampling objective combines the matching of 

feature mome nts and binned distributions. Specifically, the 

sampler replaces one scenario at a time to minimize the 

weighted discrepancy between the target distribution and the 

empirical distribution of the current scenario set, and a

replacement is accepted only when  it reduces the matching error. 

The sampling procedure is detailed in  Algorithm 1 .When the scenario pool sufficiently covers the target 

distribution, the training scenario set is constructed through 

sampling and recombination. Otherwise, TrafficGen or CAT is 

invoked on the same Waymo source scenarios to supply 

missing attributes. Traffi cGen is used when greater diversity in 

road structure, traffic flow, or motion patterns is required, 

whereas CAT is used when lower TTC or THW values are 

required. No method has access to additional independent real -

world source scenarios. 

During crossover and mutation, candidate environment 

parameters may violate physical laws or task logic. To keep the 

search within a valid scenario space, we introduce the 

GeneLock mechanism. GeneLock is not designed to increase 

scenario difficulty; rather , it constrains evolutionary search to 

the feasible region of the scenario space. It checks physical 

constraints, constraints on task feasibility, and operational 

design domain (ODD) constraints. Candidates that violate these 

constraints are rejected or pr ojected back to the feasible domain. 

D. High -Value Distributions and Training Strategy Distillation 

Complete Lamarckian evolution can discover high -value 

training scenario distributions, but directly using it as a routine 

training strategy is computationally expensive. It evaluates 

multiple candidate distributions at each stage, and the resulting 

evoluti onary path may depend on the algorithm, initialization, 

and training noise. Thus, repeating complete Lamarckian 

evolution whenever a new policy is trained would limit the 

practical usability of the method. 

To address this issue, we treat complete Lamarckian 

evolution as a discovery process for high -value training 

scenario distributions rather than as the final reusable training 

strategy. The reusable output is a stable  Lamarckian Training 

Strategy  with fixed training stages and low computational cost. 

We therefore design a mechanism that extracts high -value 

scenario distributions and distills them into a training strategy, 

which compresses the environment parameters discovered 

during evolution into  a fixed se quence of training scenario 

distributions for each stage. 

The first distillation step records the environment -parameter 

vectors of high -fitness individuals after each evolutionary stage. 

These vectors are ranked by post -training performance and 

deduplicated to form the elite distribution log, which supports 

both  elite reuse during evolution and subsequent strategy 

distillation. 

Training strategy distillation does not train a new control 

policy network. In the second step, generation -wise normalized 

feature means of the elite distributions are examined for 

sustained shifts across multiple features between adjacent 

generations. In  this experiment, these change points define six 

contiguous stages; the resulting segmentation is descriptive and 

is not claimed to be unique. In the third step, the parameter 

vectors of all elite distributions within each stage are averaged 

to define the t arget distribution, after which GeneLock projects 

the averaged vector back to the feasible domain when necessary. 

A fixed -size training scenario set is then sampled for each stage. 

The Lamarckian Training Strategy  (LTS)  can be used for 

policy training without repeating complete evolution. With 12 

generations, 10 candidates per generation, and 25k training 

steps per candidate, complete evolution requires 3.0 million 

policy -training steps, excluding evaluation, whereas one LTS 

run uses 300k steps. This one -time discovery cost can be 

amortized when th e fixed strategy is reused for subsequent 

policy training. Accordingly, all claims of improved training 

efficiency refer to the distilled LTS, whereas complete 

evolution is evaluated primarily by the quality of the discovered 

path and distributions. The experiments evaluate LTS in terms 

of learning efficiency, final performance, and performance on 

held -out scenarios from both datasets. 

V.  EXPERIMENTS 

This section evaluates the proposed framework through three 

experiments. First, complete Lamarckian evolution is used as a 

discovery experiment to identify progressively improving paths 

and valuable scenario -distribution patterns. Second, the 

distilled Lam arckian Training Strategy (LTS) is compared with 

Replay [13], Curriculum [16], and CAT [23] under the same 

policy -training budget to determine whether the discovered 

patterns provide efficient, reusable training without online 

evolution and improve perform ance on the disjoint Waymo and 

nuScenes test scenarios. Third, the ablation study removes 

scenario search and capability inheritance separately to 

examine their roles in the observed behavior. 

A. Experimental Setup 

The experiments are implemented in the MetaDrive 

simulator [42], and TD3 [43] is used as the policy -learning 

algorithm. All real -world source scenarios used for training 

originate from 400 Waymo scenarios. TrafficGen and CAT are 

applied only to these sourc es to derive 1,510 generalized 

variants and 658 safety -critical variants; these outputs do not 

introduce additional independent real -world source data. 

Replay, Curriculum, CAT, and the proposed method therefore 

share the same source scenarios and maximum t raining budget, 

while their actual training sequences differ according to their 

organization or generation mechanisms. The fitness evaluation 

set, which is disjoint from both the training scenarios and the 

final test sets, contains 50 Waymo and 50 nuScenes  scenarios, 

whereas the final test sets contain disjoint sets of 100 Waymo 

and 83 nuScenes scenarios. Because the nuScenes evaluation 

scenarios participate in fitness evaluation, the nuScenes test 

results measure performance on held -out scenarios from a 

se cond dataset rather than zero -shot generalization to an 

entirely unseen domain. The evaluation metrics cover 

efficiency, safety, traffic compliance, and performance across 

the two datasets and are combined by a weighted evaluation 

function. Additional deta ils are provided in  Table A. 5.

B. Lamarckian  Evolution  Experiment 

Complete Lamarckian evolution is used to discover a high -

performing training path and stage -wise patterns in scenario 

distributions for subsequent strategy distillation. Best Evolution 

denotes the path with the highest fitness selected according to 

post -tr aining performance on the fitness evaluation set before 

the final test set is accessed. Fig.  3. Evolutionary tree produced by Lamarckian evolution. 

Fig.  4. Stage -wise scenario distribution characteristics of different methods. 

The search comprises 12 generations with a population size 

of 10. In each generation, every candidate undergoes 25,000 

training steps on its scenario distribution and is then evaluated 

under the same protocol. Each generation contains four  cloned ,

three crossover, and three mutation candidates; an elite gene 

pool reuses historically high -value scenario distributions to 

improve search efficiency. 

Fig.  3 shows the evolutionary tree obtained from 12 

generations with a population size of 10. Each curve represents 

an evolutionary branch, and a branch ends when its individual 

is eliminated. The branches diverge substantially in evaluation 

performance, while s election retains individuals with higher 

scores and produces several progressively improving paths. 

Fig.  4 compares nine scenario distribution features across 

five methods.  Lane and road -edge proportions measure their 

respective shares of map features. Higher lane proportion 

suggests a regular, lane -dominated layout, whereas higher road -

edge proportion indicates stronger boundaries and greater 

geometric complexity.  Vehicle density and initial speed 

describe traffic intensity and the initial motion state. Minimum 

time to collision  (TTC)  and time headway  (THW)  measure 

conflict urgency and car -following gaps, indicating safety 

margins. Acceleration, lateral acceleration, and jerk  describe 

motion intensity, abruptness, and control smoothness. The 

heatmaps report feature values standardized as z -scores .

Fig.  4(a) visualizes the elite distribution statistics recorded 

during complete Lamarckian evolution.  Their dominant 

features shift across generations, and sustained changes in the 

normalized feature means allow the evolutionary record to be 

descriptively divided into six contiguous stages, with the 

learning focus rotating among basic driving, smooth contr ol, 

traffic interaction, road structure, safety margins, and policy 

stability . Fig.  4(b) presents LTS, whose target distribution in 

each stage is obtained by averaging the elite parameter vectors 

assigned to that stage. The close correspondence between  Fig. 

4(a) and (b) therefore reflects the distillation procedure.  Fig. 

4(c) -(e) show Replay, Curriculum, and CAT, respectively. 

Replay maintains the naturalistic Waymo distribution, 

Curriculum follows a conventional  three -stage progression 

from easy to difficult scenarios, and CAT emphasizes more 

adversarial and hazardous scenarios. 

Overall, the evolved strategy follows neither a monotonic 

easy -to -hard curriculum nor a continual increase in risk. Instead, 

its dominant  learning  challenge shifts across stages, while 

Lamarckian inheritance preserves previously acquired 

capabilities. This pattern is characterized as capability 

accumulation through stage -wise challenge rotation. Detailed 

definitions and distribution characteristics  of the six stages are 

provided in  Table  1.Stage Stage Stage Stage Stage Stage Table  1. Stage -wise  regularities  of the Lamarckian Training Strategy.                    

> Stage Steps Focus Scenario Distribution Characteristics
> Stage 10-25k Basic Driving
> Learning
> Lane proportion and vehicle density are higher, while THW is lower. This creates dense car -
> following traffic that emphasizes lane keeping and speed regulation.
> Stage 225 -75k Smooth Control
> Learning
> Lateral acceleration and jerk are lower, while THW is higher. This creates smooth, well -
> spaced traffic that emphasizes steering smoothness and car -following gap control.
> Stage 375 -150k Traffic Interaction
> Learning
> Vehicle density, initial speed, acceleration, and jerk are higher, while THW is lower. This
> creates fast, dense, dynamic traffic that emphasizes yielding, merging, and coordination.
> Stage 4150 -250k Road Structure
> Learning
> Road -edge proportion is higher, while lane proportion, density, and initial speed are lower.
> This creates sparse traffic that emphasizes adaptation to road layout and boundaries.
> Stage 5250 -275k Safety Margin
> Learning
> TTC, THW, and road -edge proportion are higher, while initial speed is lower. This creates
> slow, well -spaced traffic that emphasizes early avoidance and safe spacing.
> Stage6 275 -300k Policy Stability
> Learning
> Acceleration, lateral acceleration, and jerk are lower, while THW is higher. This creates
> stable, low -disturbance traffic that emphasizes behavioral consistency and capability retention.

Fig.  5. Capability divergence after one generation of evolution.  Starting from the same initial policy,  different candidate training 

scenario distributions are associated with distinct post -training driving behaviors .

Fig.  5 compares three policies trained for one generation 

from the same initial policy. In the same scenario, they produce 

three outcomes: collision, out -of -road failure, and successful 

completion. Their training distributions differ in interaction 

intensity, mot ion variability, and safety margins, which may 

contribute to the observed behavioral divergence. 

In  Fig.  5(a),  the candidate training scenario distribution has 

the highest interaction intensity among the three cases: a vehicle 

density of 10.17 veh/km, an initial speed of 3.61 m/s, 

longitudinal and lateral accelerations of 1.71 and 0.50 m/s² , and 

a jerk of 1.15 m/s³ . It also has the smallest safety margins, with 

minimum TTC and THW values of 6.88 and 2.66 s. The 

resulting policy accepts a narrow gap and collides with a 

surrounding vehicle. This outcome may be associated with 

frequent exposure to dense, dynamic intera ctions and limited 

yielding margins. 

In  Fig.  5(b), the candidate training scenario distribution has 

the lowest vehicle density but retains noticeable motion 

variability, with an initial speed of 2.25 m/s, longitudinal and 

lateral accelerations of 0.85 and 0.28 m/s² , and a jerk of 0.50 

m/s³ . The resulting policy avoids the immediate conflict but 

subsequently leaves the road after a large lateral correction. One 

possible explanation is that this distribution provides 

experience in conflict response but less coverage of lateral 

recovery near road boundaries. 

In  Fig.  5(c), the candidate training scenario distribution has 

the smoothest dynamic profile: its vehicle density is 7.29 

veh/km; its initial speed, longitudinal acceleration, lateral 

acceleration, and jerk are the lowest at 1.44 m/s, 0.60 m/s² , 0.21 

m/s² , and 0.33  m/s³ ; and its minimum TTC and THW are the 

largest at 7.82 and 3.91 s. The resulting policy slows earlier, 

steers smoothly, and completes the scenario. These cases do not 

establish a causal effect for any single scenario factor, but they 

show that different training scenario distributions can yield 

substantially different outcomes after training under the same 

initial policy and evaluation scenario. This observation 

provides an intuitive illustration of why the elite distributions 

analyzed in  Fig.  4 matter for training. ollision 

ut o oad 

Success 

= 2 = 4 = 5 

= 2 = 4 = 5 

= 2 = 4 = 8 Table 2.  Results  of  different training strategies .                                                     

> Method Score ↑Waymo nuScenes
> Success %↑Collision %↓Out -of -Road %↓Success %↑Collision %↓Out -of -Road %↓
> Replay 78.62 ±1.55 79.60 ±1.14 18.20 ±1.10 2.80 ±1.10 65.54 ±4.64 22.17 ±2.64 9.40 ±1.98
> Curriculum 79.77 ±1.36 81.00 ±2.92 15.20 ±1.30 2.60 ±2.30 66.51 ±1.32 22.89 ±3.71 9.16 ±3.96
> CAT 80.09 ±1.87 81.60 ±1.95 16.20 ±1.92 2.00 ±1.22 66.51 ±3.94 20.00 ±2.50 10.60 ±2.61
> LTS 82.71 ±0.42 85.40 ±2.30 13.20 ±3.11 1.60 ±0.89 69.16 ±2.90 21.93 ±4.92 5.30 ±1.83
> Best Evolution 83.98 82.00 16.00 2.00 78.31 13.25 7.23

Based on the elite -distribution patterns in  Fig.  4(a), the high -

fitness scenario distributions discovered during complete 

evolution are distilled into a lightweight LTS with a fixed 

sequence of stages. This process does not copy the single path 

with the highest score. Instead, it records elite distributio n

vectors, uses their generation -wise descriptive shifts to group 

contiguous generations into six stages, and averages the elite 

vectors within each stage to obtain the corresponding LTS 

target distribution. The resulting strategy is summarized in 

Table  1, while the exact stage vectors, sampled scenario sets, 

and policy checkpoints are available in the project repository. 

C. Validation of the  Lamarckian Training Strategy 

We compare the Lamarckian Training Strategy (LTS) with 

Replay, Curriculum, and CAT under the same learning 

algorithm, maximum training budget, evaluation protocol, and 

common set of 400 Waymo source scenarios. Each method 

organizes or generates its actual  training sequence exclusively 

from these common sources according to its own mechanism. 

Replay is the reference baseline, whereas Curriculum and CAT 

are comparison methods.  For each training strategy, five 

policies are independently trained from scratch us ing different 

random seeds.  Table 2  reports mean  and  standard deviation 

across these runs, and the shaded regions in  Fig.  6 denote 95% 

confidence intervals. Performance is evaluated every 25k steps, 

giving all methods the same twelve evaluation points within the 

300k -step budget. 

Fig.  6. Best -so -far performance curves and confidence intervals 

for different training strategies. 

Fig.  6 and  Table 2  show that LTS achieves the highest mean 

overall score in the validation experiment, outperforming 

Replay, Curriculum, and CAT. On the Waymo test set, it 

reaches a success rate of 85.40%, with collision and out -of -road 

(OOR) rates of 13.20% and 1.60%, resp ectively. On the 

nuScenes test set, its success rate reaches 69.16%, and its OOR 

rate is 5.30%. With all component metrics expressed in 

percentage points,  the  evaluation function in  Table A. 3

computes a weighted overall score in [0, 100] from the test 

results, and performance loss is defined as 100 minus this score. 

Relative to Replay, the corresponding loss reductions are 25.07% 

for Best Evolution and 19.13% for LTS. 

Replay performs reasonably well on the Waymo test set but 

less strongly on the held -out nuScenes scenarios. Curriculum 

and CAT are guided by difficulty and safety -criticality 

surrogates, respectively. LTS instead rotates the dominant 

training challenge acr oss stages, moving from traffic adaptation 

and control calibration to interaction learning, road -structure 

adaptation, safety -margin reinforcement, and policy 

consolidation. The results therefore support stage -specific 

distribution organization rather than  reliance on a single 

surrogate criterion. 

Overall, complete Lamarckian evolution reveals more than a 

high -scoring path tied to the original search: it also uncovers 

reusable patterns in training scenario distributions.  Although 

the Lamarckian Training Strategy does not reach the score 

achieved by Best Evolution,  it outperforms the Replay baseline 

and all compared methods without online evolution, suggesting 

that evolutionary analysis can be converted into a lightweight 

training strategy. 

D. Ablation Study 

The ablation study uses the same computational budget 

across stages, evaluation sets, evaluation function, initial policy, 

and random seed as the full evolutionary experiment. The w/o 

Outer Search variant replaces environment -parameter 

inheritance, crossov er, mutation, and elite -pool selection with 

random sampling at each stage from the same scenario pool, 

while retaining policy -state inheritance across stages. The w/o 

Capability Inheritance variant retains the evolved distributions 

selected for each stage  but deliberately reinitializes every stage 

from the fixed initial policy before the 25k -step update. Table 3. Ablation results for the key mechanisms.                                              

> Setting Score ↑Δ
> Waymo nuScenes
> Success %↑Collision %↓Out -of -Road %↓Success %↑Collision %↓Out -of -Road %↓
> Full Model 83.98 —82.00 16.00 2.00 78.31 13.25 7.23
> w/o Search 71.78 -12.20 70.00 17.00 11.00 56.63 25.30 15.66
> w/o Inheritance 67.89 -16.09 67.00 25.00 8.00 50.60 25.30 22.89

The w/o Outer Search variant examines whether 

evolutionary search identifies useful stage -specific 

distributions. The w/o Capability Inheritance variant is a

deliberately destructive intervention that examines whether 

capabilities must be preserved across  stages: although total 

computation over all stages is unchanged, no individual policy 

accumulates more than one stage of learning. It is therefore 

interpreted as a mechanistic check rather than a policy -age -

matched estimate of the isolated numerical effect  of inheritance .

Fig.  7. Learning curves for the ablation study. 

Table 3  and  Fig.  7 report the ablation results. Removing outer 

search reduces the best score from 83.98 to 71.78 and the held -

out nuScenes success rate from 78.31% to 56.63%, indicating 

that random scenario selection does not reproduce the stage -

specific distributions ident ified by evolutionary search. 

Removing capability inheritance further reduces the best score 

to 67.89 and the held -out nuScenes success rate to 50.60%. 

Because every stage then restarts from the initial policy, 

capabilities acquired in earlier stages are r epeatedly discarded. 

This degradation provides a mechanistic sanity check that high -

quality stage distributions alone are insufficient without cross -

stage capability accumulation; its magnitude should not be 

interpreted as an isolated causal effect size fo r inheritance. 

E. Discussion 

The experiments highlight two roles of the Lamarckian 

evolutionary framework. First, complete evolution is a

discovery process that identifies high -performing paths and 

valuable distribution patterns across policy -development stages. 

Second, those patterns  can be distilled into a low -cost LTS that 

is used without online population search. This study is intended 

as a proof -of -concept investigation of strategy discovery 

through evolutionary competition under a controlled simulator 

protocol, rather than an eng ineering study of a production -scale 

online training system. The emphasis is therefore on whether 

competitive evolution can reveal reusable distribution patterns 

and whether those patterns remain effective after distillation. 

VI. CONCLUSION 

This paper proposes a Lamarckian evolutionary framework 

for optimizing training strategies in autonomous driving, 

treating training scenario distributions as searchable 

optimization variables. At the outer level, evolution organizes 

the training scenario d istributions; at the inner level, learning 

updates policy capability; and Lamarckian inheritance transfers 

the learned policy state across stages. Together, these 

mechanisms form a closed loop of distribution search, policy 

learning, performance -based comp etition, and capability 

inheritance. 

The results show that complete Lamarckian evolution 

identifies high -value scenario distributions for individual stages 

that can be distilled into an effective  Lamarckian Training 

Strategy  with six stages. Under the same training budget, the 

Lamarckian Training Strategy achieves higher overall 

performance than Replay, Curriculum, and CAT and remains 

stable across repeated runs. Best Evolution illustrates the 

additional potential of online e volutionary search, while the 

ablations show that both search over sc enario distributions and 

capability inheritance contribute to the observed gains. 

This work has several limitations. The experiments are 

conducted primarily in MetaDrive with TD3, and transfer to 

other learning algorithms, simulators, and large real -world 

scenario libraries remains to be verified. Complete Lamarckian 

evolution is also c omputationally expensive. Best Evolution is 

reported as a reference from a single search run, and the quality 

of the distilled  Lamarckian Training Strategy  depends on the 

scenario generator and evaluation protocol. 

Future work will evaluate transfer across additional learning 

paradigms and algorithms for autonomous driving, incorporate 

richer generative models and real -world road testing scenarios, 

and investigate more efficient evolutionary search and strategy 

disti llation. Further theoretical analysis and high -fidelity 

closed -loop validation will also be pursued. APPENDIX 

Table A. 1. Scenario Parameterization 

Component of  𝝓  Interpretation  Concrete  Parameter 

𝑃 𝜙 (𝑠 0) Initial scenario 

distribution 

road_ratio_lane, 

road_ratio_road_line, 

road_ratio_road_edge, 

lane_count, 

lane_width, 

curvature, 

veh_density_init, 

speed_init, 

distance_init 

𝑃 𝜙 (𝑠 𝑡 +1|𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑎 𝑡 , 𝑏 𝑡 ) Environment 

dynamics 

max_engine_force, 

max_brake_force, 

wheel_friction, 

max_steering, 

mass 

𝑃 𝜙 (𝑏 𝑡 +1|𝑠 𝑡 )

Background -

vehicle behavior 

distribution 

accel eration ,

lat eral _accel eration ,

jerk, 

min_ttc, 

min_thw, 

min_headway 

Table A.2 . Training Scenario Set Sampling 

Algorithm 1. Training Scenario Set Sampling 

Require:  scenario pool  𝑃  = {𝑠 𝑖 }𝑖 =1 

> 𝑀

, target distribution  𝜙 , number 

of scenarios  𝑁 , feature set  𝐹 , tolerances  𝜀 , swap budget  𝐾 .

Ensure:  sampled scenario set  𝑆 𝜙 , where  |𝑆 𝜙 | = 𝑁 .

01:  for  each scenario  𝑠 𝑖  in  𝑃  do 

02:  𝑧 𝑖  ← 𝐸𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝐹𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠 (𝑠 𝑖 , 𝐹 )

03:  if  𝑧 𝑖  violates GeneLock  then  remove  𝑠 𝑖 

04:  end if 

05:  end for 

06:  𝑆  ← 𝑈𝑛𝑖𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒 (𝑃 , 𝑁 ) // seeded initialization 

07:  𝜇 (𝑆 ) ← 1 

> |𝑆 |

∑ 𝑧 𝑖 𝑠 𝑖 ∈𝑆 

08:  𝐿 ∗ ← 𝐷 (𝑆 , 𝜙 ) = ∑ (𝜇 𝑚 (𝑆 )−𝜙 𝑚 

> max (𝜀 𝑚 ,𝛿 )

)2

> 𝑚 𝜖𝐹

09:  𝑆 ∗ ← 𝑆 

10:  for  𝑘  = 1 to  𝐾  do 

11:  select randomly  𝑠 𝑜 𝑢𝑡  from  𝑆 

12:  select randomly  𝑠 𝑖 𝑛  from  𝑃  ∖ 𝑆 

13:  𝑆 ′ ← 𝑆  ∖ {𝑠 𝑜𝑢𝑡 } ⋃ {𝑠 𝑖 𝑛 } // one -swap proposal 

14:  𝜇 (𝑆 ′) ← 1 

> |𝑆 ′|

∑ 𝑧 𝑖 𝑠 𝑖 ∈𝑆 ′

15:  𝐿 

′ ← 𝐷 (𝑆 ′, 𝜙 )

16:  if  𝐿 ′ ≤ 𝐿 ∗ then 

17:  𝑆  ← 𝑆 ′; 𝑆 ∗ ← 𝑆 ′; 𝐿 ∗ ← 𝐿 ′

18:  end if 

19:  end for 

20:  materialize  𝑆 ∗ by hard -linking selected scenario files 

21:  return  𝑆 ∗

Table A. 3. Evaluation Function 

Metric  Weight   

> Waymo
> Success Rate

𝑀 1 𝛽 1 0.36   

> Collision Rate

𝑀 2 𝛽 2 -0.15   

> Out of Road

𝑀 3 𝛽 3 -0.09   

> nuScenes
> Success Rate

𝑀 4 𝛽 4 0.24   

> Collision Rate

𝑀 5 𝛽 5 -0.10   

> Out of Road

𝑀 6 𝛽 6 -0.06   

> Constant Term

𝛽 0 40 

𝐹  = 𝛽 0 ∑ 𝛽 𝑖  · 𝑀 𝑖 

Table A. 4. Algorithm Parameters 

Parameter  Setting 

Evolutionary generations  12 

Population size  10 

Training steps per stage  25k 

Clone : crossover : mutation  4: 3: 3

Selected parents (top : random)  3: 1

Elite gene pool size  Top 20 

Waymo evaluation weight  0.6 

nuScenes  evaluation weight  0.4 

Table A. 5. Experimental Parameters 

Parameter  Setting 

Simulator  Meta Drive  0.4.3 

Environment type  ScenarioEnv 

Number of LiDAR rays  30 

Observation dimension  112 

Action dimension  2

Training model  TD3 

Learning rate  3e -4

Batch size  256 

Actor  network  MLP(112, 256, 256, 2) 

Critic network  MLP(11 4, 256, 256,  1)

Training steps  300k 

Evaluation interval  25k 

Common Waymo source scenarios  400 

TrafficGen  variants derived from 

Waymo sources  1510 

CAT variants derived from Waymo 

sources  658 

fitness evaluation set: 

Waymo  50 

fitness evaluation set: 

held -out nuScenes  50 

Final test set (Waymo)  100 

Final test set (nuScenes)  83 

Repeated runs  5

Evolutionary search seed  42 REFERENCES 

[1]  J. Kim and J. Canny, "Interpretable Learning for Self -Driving Cars 

by Visualizing Causal Attention," in  2017 IEEE International 

Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 22 -29 Oct. 2017, pp. 2961 -

2969, doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2017.320. 

[2]  Y. Han  et al. , "AppleVLM: End -to -End Autonomous Driving With 

Advanced Perception and Planning -Enhanced Vision -Language 

Models,"  IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 

vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 7028 -7043, 2026, doi: 

10.1109/TITS.2026.3658537. 

[3]  Y. Fu, A. Jain, X. Chen, Z. Mo, and X. Di, "DriveGenVLM: Real -

world Video Generation for Vision Language Model based 

Autonomous Driving," in  2024 IEEE International Automated 

Vehicle Validation Conference (IAVVC) , 22 -23 Oct. 2024, pp. 1 -6, 

doi: 10.1109/IAVVC63304.2024.10786438. 

[4]  P. Roy, S. Perisetla, S. Shriram, H. Krishnaswamy, A. Keskar, and 

R. Greer, "doScenes: An Autonomous Driving Dataset with Natural 

Language Instruction for Human Interaction and Vision -Language 

Navigation," in  2025 IEEE 28th International Conference on 

Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC) , 18 -21 Nov. 2025, pp. 

1651 -1658, doi: 10.1109/ITSC60802.2025.11423583. 

[5]  S. Park  et al. , "Saliency -Aware Quantized Imitation Learning for 

Efficient Robotic Control," in  2025 IEEE/CVF International 

Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 19 -25 Oct. 2025, pp. 

13140 -13150, doi: 10.1109/ICCV51701.2025.01221. 

[6]  H. Arai  et al. , "CoVLA: Comprehensive Vision -Language -Action 

Dataset for Autonomous Driving," in  2025 IEEE/CVF Winter 

Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) , 26 Feb. -

6 March 2025, pp. 1933 -1943, doi: 

10.1109/WACV61041.2025.00195. 

[7]  Y. Guan  et al. , "World Models for Autonomous Driving: An Initial 

Survey,"  IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles,  pp. 1 -17, 2024, 

doi: 10.1109/TIV.2024.3398357. 

[8]  X. Zhang, Z. Wu, H. Hu, J. Yang, and P. Wang, "Integrating 

Driving -Aware World Model With MPC for Autonomous Driving 

at Unsignalized T -Intersections,"  IEEE Transactions on Intelligent 

Transportation Systems,  vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 22219 -22231, 2025, doi: 

10.1109/TITS.2025.3608433. 

[9]  Y. Ma  et al. , "Position: Prospective of Autonomous Driving  -

Multimodal LLMs, World Models, Embodied Intelligence, AI 

Alignment, and Mamba," in  2025 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on 

Applications of Computer Vision Workshops (WACVW) , 28 Feb. -4

March 2025, pp. 920 -936, doi: 

10.1109/WACVW65960.2025.00114. 

[10]  S. Riedmaier, T. Ponn, D. Ludwig, B. Schick, and F. Diermeyer, 

"Survey on Scenario -Based Safety Assessment of Automated 

Vehicles,"  IEEE Access,  vol. 8, pp. 87456 -87477, 2020, doi: 

10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2993730. 

[11]  T. Menzel, G. Bagschik, and M. Maurer, "Scenarios for 

Development, Test and Validation of Automated Vehicles," in  2018 

IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) , 26 -30 June 2018, pp. 

1821 -1827, doi: 10.1109/IVS.2018.8500406. 

[12]  A. Gupta, S. Savarese, S. Ganguli, and L. Fei -Fei, "Embodied 

Intelligence via Learning and Evolution," Nature Communications, 

vol. 12, Art. no. 5721, 2021, doi: 10.1038/s41467 -021 -25874 -z. 

[13]  S. Ettinger  et al. , "Large Scale Interactive Motion Forecasting for 

Autonomous Driving: The Waymo Open Motion Dataset," in 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on 

Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2021, pp. 9710 -9719. 

[14]  H. Caesar et al., "nuScenes: A Multimodal Dataset for Autonomous 

Driving," in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. 

(CVPR), 2020, pp. 11621 -11631. 

[15]  P. Wang, X. Huang, X. Cheng, D. Zhou, Q. Geng, and R. Yang, 

"The ApolloScape Open Dataset for Autonomous Driving and Its 

Application,"  IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine 

Intelligence,  2019. 

[16]  T. Matiisen, A. Oliver, T. Cohen, and J. Schulman, "Teacher -

Student Curriculum Learning,"  IEEE Transactions on Neural 

Networks and Learning Systems,  vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 3732 -3740, 2020, 

doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2019.2934906. 

[17]  L. Anzalone, P. Barra, S. Barra, A. Castiglione, and M. Nappi, "An 

End -to -End Curriculum Learning Approach for Autonomous 

Driving Scenarios,"  IEEE Transactions on Intelligent 

Transportation Systems,  vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 19817 -19826, 2022, doi: 

10.1109/TITS.2022.3160673. 

[18]  Z. Sheng, Z. Huang, Y. Qu, Y. Leng, S. Bhavanam, and S. Chen, 

"CurricuVLM: Towards safe autonomous driving via personalized 

safety -critical curriculum learning with vision -language models," 

Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies,  vol. 185, 

p. 105549, 2026, doi:  10.1016/j.trc.2026.105549 .

[19]  C. Xu, A. Petiushko, D. Zhao, and B. Li, "DiffScene: Diffusion -

Based Safety -Critical Scenario Generation for Autonomous 

Vehicles," in  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial 

Intelligence , 2025, vol. 39, 8 ed., pp. 8797 -8805, doi: 

10.1609/aaai.v39i8.32951. 

[20]  J. Gu, C. Sun, and H. Zhao, "DenseTNT: End -to -End Trajectory 

Prediction from Dense Goal Sets," in  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF 

International Conference on Computer Vision , 2021, pp. 15303 -

15312. 

[21]  X. Chen, X. Gao, J. Zhao, K. Ye, and C. Z. Xu, "AdvDiffuser: 

Natural Adversarial Example Synthesis with Diffusion Models," in 

2023 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision 

(ICCV) , 1-6 Oct. 2023, pp. 4539 -4549, doi: 

10.1109/ICCV51070.2023.00421. 

[22]  S. Feng  et al. , "Dense reinforcement learning for safety validation 

of autonomous vehicles,"  Nature,  vol. 615, no. 7953, pp. 620 -627, 

2023, doi: 10.1038/s41586 -023 -05732 -2. 

[23]  L. Zhang, Z. Peng, Q. Li, and B. Zhou, "CAT: Closed -loop 

Adversarial Training for Safe End -to -End Driving," in  7th Annual 

Conference on Robot Learning , 2023. 

[24]  Y. Mei, T. Nie, J. Sun, and Y. Tian, "LLM -Attacker: Enhancing 

Closed -Loop Adversarial Scenario Generation for Autonomous 

Driving With Large Language Models,"  IEEE Transactions on 

Intelligent Transportation Systems,  pp. 1-9, 2025, doi: 

10.1109/TITS.2025.3578383. 

[25]  X. Huang, Z. Li, G. He, M. Zhou, and E. Shechtman, "Self Forcing: 

Bridging the Train -Test Gap in Autoregressive Video Diffusion," in 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , D. Belgrave  et 

al. , Eds., 2025, vol. 38: Curran Associates, Inc., pp. 167283 -167308. 

[26]  F. Codevilla, A. M. Lopez, V. Koltun, and A. Dosovitskiy, "On 

Offline Evaluation of Vision -based Driving Models," in 

Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision 

(ECCV) , 2018. 

[27]  N. Karnchanachari  et al. , "Towards learning -based planning: The 

nuPlan benchmark for real -world autonomous driving," in  2024 

IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,

13 -17 May 2024, pp. 629 -636, doi: 

10.1109/ICRA57147.2024.10610077. 

[28]  J. H. Holland,  Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems . Ann 

Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1975. 

[29]  D. Whitley, V. S. Gordon, and K. Mathias, "Lamarckian Evolution, 

the Baldwin Effect and Function Optimization," in  Parallel Problem 

Solving from Nature  -- PPSN III , 1994: Springer, pp. 6 -15. 

[30]  H. X. Liu and S. Feng, "Curse of rarity for autonomous vehicles," 

Nature Communications,  vol. 15, no. 1, p. 4808, 2024, doi: 

10.1038/s41467 -024 -49194 -0. 

[31]  S. Khaitan and J. M. Dolan, "State Dropout -Based Curriculum 

Reinforcement Learning for Self -Driving at Unsignalized 

Intersections," in  2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on 

Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 23 -27 Oct. 2022, pp. 12219 -

12224, doi: 10.1109/IROS47612.2022.9981109. 

[32]  Z. Peng, X. Zhou, L. Zheng, Y. Wang, and J. Ma, "Reward -Driven 

Automated Curriculum Learning for Interaction -Aware Self -

Driving at Unsignalized Intersections," in  2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) ,

14 -18 Oct. 2024, pp. 5088 -5095, doi: 

10.1109/IROS58592.2024.10801582. 

[33]  A. Abouelazm, T. Weinstein, T. Joseph, P. Schö rner, and J. M. 

Zö llner, "Automatic Curriculum Learning for Driving Scenarios: 

Towards Robust and Efficient Reinforcement Learning," in  2025 

IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) , 22 -25 June 2025, pp. 

2333 -2340, doi: 10.1109/IV64158.2025.11097458. 

[34]  R. Wang, J. Lehman, J. Clune, and K. O. Stanley, "Paired Open -

Ended Trailblazer (POET): Endlessly Generating Increasingly 

Complex and Diverse Learning Environments and Their Solutions," 

arXiv:1901.01753, 2019. 

[35]  M. Dennis et al., "Emergent Complexity and Zero -Shot Transfer via 

Unsupervised Environment Design," in Advances in Neural 

Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, 2020. 

[36]  M. Jiang, E. Grefenstette, and T. Rocktä schel, "Prioritized Level 

Replay," in Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on 

Machine Learning, 2021, pp. 4940 -4950. 

[37]  J. Parker -Holder et al., "Evolving Curricula with Regret -Based 

Environment Design," in Proceedings of the 39th International 

Conference on Machine Learning, 2022, pp. 17473 -17498. 

[38]  M. Jaderberg et al., "Population Based Training of Neural 

Networks," arXiv:1711.09846, 2017. 

[39]  W. Ding, C. Xu, M. Arief, H. Lin, B. Li, and D. Zhao, "A Survey on 

Safety -Critical Driving Scenario Generation -A Methodological 

Perspective,"  IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation 

Systems,  vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 6971 -6988, 2023, doi: 

10.1109/TITS.2023.3259322. 

[40]  H. -G. Beyer and H. - . Schwe el, “ volution strategies —A

comprehensive introduction,”  Natural Computing , vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 

3–52, 2002, doi: 10.1023/A:1015059928466. 

[41]  L. Feng, Q. Li, Z. Peng, S. Tan, and B. Zhou, "TrafficGen: Learning 

to Generate Diverse and Realistic Traffic Scenarios," in  2023 IEEE 

International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 29 

May -2 June 2023, pp. 3567 -3575, doi: 

10.1109/ICRA48891.2023.10160296. 

[42]  Q. Li, Z. Peng, L. Feng, Q. Zhang, Z. Xue, and B. Zhou, "MetaDrive: 

Composing Diverse Driving Scenarios for Generalizable 

Reinforcement Learning,"  IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis 

& Machine Intelligence,  vol. 45, no. 03, pp. 3461 -3475, 2023, doi: 

10.1109/TPAMI.2022.3190471. 

[43]  S. Fujimoto, H. van Hoof, and D. Meger, "Addressing Function 

Approximation Error in Actor -Critic Methods," in  Proceedings of 

the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning , 2018, pp. 

1587 -1596. 

Yichun Ye  received the B.S. degree in 

transportation engineering from Southwest 

Jiaotong Universit y, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.  He

is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree with 

the Department of  Traffic Engineering, Tongji 

University, Shanghai, China.  His research focuses 

on  safety testing of highly automated vehicles. 

He Zhang  received  the  Ph.D. degree  in 

transportation engineering from Tongji University, 

Shanghai, China.  She is currently a lecturer in 

transportation engineering at Southwest Jiaotong 

University. Her research focuses on safety testing 

of highly automated vehicles. 

Ye Tian  (Senior  Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. 

degree in transportation engineering from The 

University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA, in 2015. 

He is currently a Professor of transportation 

engineering with Tongji University, Shanghai, 

China. He is an Associate Editor for  IEEE 

TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT 

TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS  and  IEEE 

TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT 

VEHICLES . His research interests include AI 

safety assurance and autonomous driving testing. 

Jian Sun  (Senior Member, IEEE) received the 

Ph.D. degree in transportation engineering from 

Tongji University, Shanghai, China. He is currently 

a Professor of transportation engineering with 

Tongji University. His research interests include 

intelligent transportat ion systems, traffic flow 

theory, AI in transportation, and traffic simulation.